Title: 5 Fun Physics Phenomena
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Xp_imnO6WE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] Five fun physics phenomena. Number one, Five fun physics phenomena. Number one, Five fun physics phenomena. Number one, have a friend hold a cane out have a friend hold a cane out have a friend hold a cane out horizontally for you or another similar horizontally for you or another similar horizontally for you or another similar object and putting your two index object and putting your two index object and putting your two index fingers together, try to place them fingers together, try to place them fingers together, try to place them underneath the center of mass. When they underneath the center of mass. When they underneath the center of mass. When they let go, you will find it doesn't let go, you will find it doesn't let go, you will find it doesn't normally work. But now try putting each normally work. But now try putting each normally work. But now try putting each index finger at opposite ends of the index finger at opposite ends of the index finger at opposite ends of the cane and then moving your index fingers cane and then moving your index fingers cane and then moving your index fingers in towards the middle. What you will in towards the middle. What you will in towards the middle. What you will find is that they always end up right find is that they always end up right find is that they always end up right under the center of mass of the cane. under the center of mass of the cane. under the center of mass of the cane. You can try starting off asymmetrically You can try starting off asymmetrically You can try starting off asymmetrically and they will still end up under the and they will still end up under the and they will still end up under the center of mass. You can try going at center of mass. You can try going at center of mass. You can try going at different speeds, really slowly or really fast. But you still end up perfectly under the But you still end up perfectly under the But you still end up perfectly under the center of mass. center of mass. center of mass. How does this work? Number two, the How does this work? Number two, the How does this work? Number two, the phone flip. Have you ever tried to spin phone flip. Have you ever tried to spin phone flip. Have you ever tried to spin your phone? If you do it in this your phone? If you do it in this your phone? If you do it in this direction, it's pretty easy. It stays direction, it's pretty easy. It stays direction, it's pretty easy. It stays nicely aligned. If you spin it along its nicely aligned. If you spin it along its nicely aligned. If you spin it along its short axis, you'll also find it spins short axis, you'll also find it spins short axis, you'll also find it spins very well. But if you try to flip your very well. But if you try to flip your very well. But if you try to flip your phone end over end like this, you can't phone end over end like this, you can't phone end over end like this, you can't do it cleanly. The phone will never flip do it cleanly. The phone will never flip do it cleanly. The phone will never flip simply end over end without also simply end over end without also simply end over end without also rotating in one of the other directions. rotating in one of the other directions. rotating in one of the other directions. Even when I make an almost perfect flip, Even when I make an almost perfect flip, Even when I make an almost perfect flip, instabilities grow until the phone instabilities grow until the phone instabilities grow until the phone rotates around another axis. Why can't No, I still can't do it. No, I still can't do it. No, I still can't do it. Why is it so? Number three, you've Why is it so? Number three, you've Why is it so? Number three, you've probably seen that if you rub a cup on probably seen that if you rub a cup on probably seen that if you rub a cup on your hair, you can make it electrically your hair, you can make it electrically your hair, you can make it electrically charged and if you bring it close to a charged and if you bring it close to a charged and if you bring it close to a stream of water, you can actually cause stream of water, you can actually cause stream of water, you can actually cause that stream to deflect. Now, usually that stream to deflect. Now, usually that stream to deflect. Now, usually this is used in chemistry textbooks as a this is used in chemistry textbooks as a this is used in chemistry textbooks as a demonstration of the polar nature of demonstration of the polar nature of demonstration of the polar nature of water. Water is a molecule with a more water. Water is a molecule with a more water. Water is a molecule with a more positive side and a more negative side. positive side and a more negative side. positive side and a more negative side. And so what happens, so you're told, is And so what happens, so you're told, is And so what happens, so you're told, is that the water molecule flips around so that the water molecule flips around so that the water molecule flips around so the positive side of the water faces the the positive side of the water faces the the positive side of the water faces the negative side of the cup. and that is negative side of the cup. and that is negative side of the cup. and that is what attracts the water to the cup. But what attracts the water to the cup. But what attracts the water to the cup. But this is not the real explanation. If you this is not the real explanation. If you this is not the real explanation. If you have a uniform electric field, there is have a uniform electric field, there is have a uniform electric field, there is an equal force pulling the positive side an equal force pulling the positive side an equal force pulling the positive side towards it as there is pushing the towards it as there is pushing the towards it as there is pushing the negative side away from it. And so you negative side away from it. And so you negative side away from it. And so you can't actually do more than just turn can't actually do more than just turn can't actually do more than just turn the molecules. You would need a really the molecules. You would need a really the molecules. You would need a really really strong gradient in your electric really strong gradient in your electric really strong gradient in your electric field to make this work at all. And it field to make this work at all. And it field to make this work at all. And it basically is just not going to happen basically is just not going to happen basically is just not going to happen from a cup. So, why is the stream from a cup. So, why is the stream from a cup. So, why is the stream actually attracted to a charged cup? actually attracted to a charged cup? actually attracted to a charged cup? That is the question. Number four, take That is the question. Number four, take That is the question. Number four, take a piece of your favorite cereal and drop a piece of your favorite cereal and drop a piece of your favorite cereal and drop it into a bowl of water. Then, using a it into a bowl of water. Then, using a it into a bowl of water. Then, using a very strong magnet, try to pull the very strong magnet, try to pull the very strong magnet, try to pull the cereal around. Isn't that cool? So, why is cereal Isn't that cool? So, why is cereal Isn't that cool? So, why is cereal magnetic? And finally, five, the tea bag magnetic? And finally, five, the tea bag magnetic? And finally, five, the tea bag rocket. Take a tea bag and cut off the rocket. Take a tea bag and cut off the rocket. Take a tea bag and cut off the sealed end very carefully. sealed end very carefully. sealed end very carefully. Now, dump out the tea. Form the tea bag into a square column Form the tea bag into a square column Form the tea bag into a square column and balance it on the plate. and balance it on the plate. and balance it on the plate. Now, light the top of the tea bag on Now, light the top of the tea bag on Now, light the top of the tea bag on fire. Try to light it evenly on all fire. Try to light it evenly on all fire. Try to light it evenly on all sides. sides. sides. Get ready for takeoff in three, two, Get ready for takeoff in three, two, Get ready for takeoff in three, two, one. one. one. Ha. Yeah, Ha. Yeah, Ha. Yeah, that is the beauty of the teaag rocket. that is the beauty of the teaag rocket. that is the beauty of the teaag rocket. So, why did that happen? So, why did that happen? So, why did that happen? So, how do all of these phenomena work? So, how do all of these phenomena work? So, how do all of these phenomena work? Let me know in the comments or make a Let me know in the comments or make a Let me know in the comments or make a video explaining any or all of them or video explaining any or all of them or video explaining any or all of them or subscribe to the channel and I'll post subscribe to the channel and I'll post subscribe to the channel and I'll post the answers next week. I hope you enjoyed those fun physics I hope you enjoyed those fun physics I hope you enjoyed those fun physics phenomena. I know a guy who would, the phenomena. I know a guy who would, the phenomena. I know a guy who would, the former commander of the International former commander of the International former commander of the International Space Station, Commander Chris Hatfield. Space Station, Commander Chris Hatfield. Space Station, Commander Chris Hatfield. I'm actually hosting live events with I'm actually hosting live events with I'm actually hosting live events with him in late August in Sydney and Canra. him in late August in Sydney and Canra. him in late August in Sydney and Canra. I am so looking forward to that. Now, I am so looking forward to that. Now, I am so looking forward to that. Now, the Sydney shows are all sold out, but the Sydney shows are all sold out, but the Sydney shows are all sold out, but there are still, as of now, tickets to there are still, as of now, tickets to there are still, as of now, tickets to the CRA show. So, if you want to come to the CRA show. So, if you want to come to the CRA show. So, if you want to come to that, check out the link in the that, check out the link in the that, check out the link in the description. Now, Chris Hatfield description. Now, Chris Hatfield description. Now, Chris Hatfield actually wrote a book called An actually wrote a book called An actually wrote a book called An Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth. And Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth. And Astronaut's Guide to Life on Earth. And I am listening to it right now as I I am listening to it right now as I I am listening to it right now as I travel around the world. And it is travel around the world. And it is travel around the world. And it is awesome because it contains great awesome because it contains great awesome because it contains great advice, not only for people who want to advice, not only for people who want to advice, not only for people who want to become astronauts, but also for everyone become astronauts, but also for everyone become astronauts, but also for everyone who wants to lead a meaningful life here who wants to lead a meaningful life here who wants to lead a meaningful life here on Earth. And you can download this book on Earth. And you can download this book on Earth. And you can download this book for free if you like by going to for free if you like by going to for free if you like by going to audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. or you can pick any other book of your or you can pick any other book of your or you can pick any other book of your choosing for a 1-month free trial. choosing for a 1-month free trial. choosing for a 1-month free trial. Audible is a great service with over Audible is a great service with over Audible is a great service with over 150,000 titles in all areas of 150,000 titles in all areas of 150,000 titles in all areas of literature, including fiction, literature, including fiction, literature, including fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. And so, non-fiction, and periodicals. And so, non-fiction, and periodicals. And so, you can find virtually anything you want you can find virtually anything you want you can find virtually anything you want there. And by going to there. And by going to there. And by going to audible.com/veritassium, audible.com/veritassium, audible.com/veritassium, they know that I sent you and they help they know that I sent you and they help they know that I sent you and they help me out to continue making these videos me out to continue making these videos me out to continue making these videos for you for free. So, I really want to for you for free. So, I really want to for you for free. So, I really want to thank Audible for supporting me and I thank Audible for supporting me and I thank Audible for supporting me and I want to thank you for watching.