Title: Can We Really Touch Anything
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bKldI-XGHIw

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] Can we can we really touch something so Can we can we really touch something so Can we can we really touch something so that I can touch the camera? that I can touch the camera? that I can touch the camera? The question of can we really touch The question of can we really touch The question of can we really touch something is a great one. Well, let's something is a great one. Well, let's something is a great one. Well, let's say we have two electrons. I imagine say we have two electrons. I imagine say we have two electrons. I imagine what we mean by touching is that they what we mean by touching is that they what we mean by touching is that they come in and they actually physically come in and they actually physically come in and they actually physically touch. Now, one of the problems is an touch. Now, one of the problems is an touch. Now, one of the problems is an electron actually has zero size as far electron actually has zero size as far electron actually has zero size as far as we can tell, no volume. So, these as we can tell, no volume. So, these as we can tell, no volume. So, these would be infinitely scaled up. So, how would be infinitely scaled up. So, how would be infinitely scaled up. So, how do the electrons actually interact with do the electrons actually interact with do the electrons actually interact with each other? Well, they interact by each other? Well, they interact by each other? Well, they interact by exchanging a particle. In the case of exchanging a particle. In the case of exchanging a particle. In the case of the electrons, it's a photon that they the electrons, it's a photon that they the electrons, it's a photon that they exchange. So, as they come in, a photon exchange. So, as they come in, a photon exchange. So, as they come in, a photon is passed from one to the other, which is passed from one to the other, which is passed from one to the other, which changes the momentum of both of them and changes the momentum of both of them and changes the momentum of both of them and pushes them off. So, they never really pushes them off. So, they never really pushes them off. So, they never really have to touch in order to interact with have to touch in order to interact with have to touch in order to interact with each other, to exchange that particle, each other, to exchange that particle, each other, to exchange that particle, and therefore change their momentum and and therefore change their momentum and and therefore change their momentum and change directions, experience a force. change directions, experience a force. change directions, experience a force. So, I guess what do we mean by touching So, I guess what do we mean by touching So, I guess what do we mean by touching something? Every time we touch something? Every time we touch something? Every time we touch something, we are exchanging force something, we are exchanging force something, we are exchanging force carrying particles with it. And that is carrying particles with it. And that is carrying particles with it. And that is touching. If photons are both quant of touching. If photons are both quant of touching. If photons are both quant of light and the force carriers of the light and the force carriers of the light and the force carriers of the electromagnetic force, does that mean electromagnetic force, does that mean electromagnetic force, does that mean that photons propagate magnetic fields? that photons propagate magnetic fields? that photons propagate magnetic fields? And if so, why can't these photons be And if so, why can't these photons be And if so, why can't these photons be seen? That's because the photons are not seen? That's because the photons are not seen? That's because the photons are not real photons. They're virtual. Now, this real photons. They're virtual. Now, this real photons. They're virtual. Now, this is a bit of a problematic topic and one is a bit of a problematic topic and one is a bit of a problematic topic and one which I hope to address in detail in a which I hope to address in detail in a which I hope to address in detail in a coming episode. The basic idea with coming episode. The basic idea with coming episode. The basic idea with virtual particles is you can't detect virtual particles is you can't detect virtual particles is you can't detect them. There are particles that are there them. There are particles that are there them. There are particles that are there but you cannot directly detect them and but you cannot directly detect them and but you cannot directly detect them and they may not obey all of the laws that they may not obey all of the laws that they may not obey all of the laws that we force real particles to adhere to. we force real particles to adhere to. we force real particles to adhere to. For example, there's the Einstein energy For example, there's the Einstein energy For example, there's the Einstein energy momentum relation E^2= M C ^2 + P ^2 C momentum relation E^2= M C ^2 + P ^2 C momentum relation E^2= M C ^2 + P ^2 C ^2 and a virtual particle doesn't ^2 and a virtual particle doesn't ^2 and a virtual particle doesn't necessarily need to obey this equation. necessarily need to obey this equation. necessarily need to obey this equation. So you can't really detect it because if So you can't really detect it because if So you can't really detect it because if you did it would have to be a real you did it would have to be a real you did it would have to be a real particle and then it can't disobey those particle and then it can't disobey those particle and then it can't disobey those equations like that. So, this is equations like that. So, this is equations like that. So, this is something that I will delve into in a something that I will delve into in a something that I will delve into in a future episode. Who are your top three future episode. Who are your top three future episode. Who are your top three most inspirational scientists? I'm going most inspirational scientists? I'm going most inspirational scientists? I'm going to take Einstein, Fineman, and Tesla. to take Einstein, Fineman, and Tesla. to take Einstein, Fineman, and Tesla. Who are your most inspirational Who are your most inspirational Who are your most inspirational scientists? scientists? scientists? Hey, Derek. I guess a question that's Hey, Derek. I guess a question that's Hey, Derek. I guess a question that's been on the minds of a lot of us for a been on the minds of a lot of us for a been on the minds of a lot of us for a while now is who would win a chin-up while now is who would win a chin-up while now is who would win a chin-up competition between you and Henry from competition between you and Henry from competition between you and Henry from Minute Physics? Minute Physics? Minute Physics? Now, I wish this was a hypothetical, but Now, I wish this was a hypothetical, but Now, I wish this was a hypothetical, but we actually did this on the tube in we actually did this on the tube in we actually did this on the tube in London. So, roll the tape. London. So, roll the tape. London. So, roll the tape. [Music] Wow, look at Wow, look at Wow, look at [Music] me. This is impressive. This is impressive. This is impressive. [Music] [Music] [Music] Yeah, do that. Yeah, do that. Yeah, do that. Keep going, guys. Very good, loser. Very good, loser. Very good, loser. That was nice. You're a champion. That was nice. You're a champion. That was nice. You're a champion. How you feeling? How you feeling? How you feeling? So tired. So tired. So tired. I thought it would be Henry. That guy is I thought it would be Henry. That guy is I thought it would be Henry. That guy is ripped. So at school, they say atoms ripped. So at school, they say atoms ripped. So at school, they say atoms want to have their outermost electron want to have their outermost electron want to have their outermost electron shells full and will willingly become shells full and will willingly become shells full and will willingly become ions in order to achieve that. Well, ions in order to achieve that. Well, ions in order to achieve that. Well, why? And why do the shells have the why? And why do the shells have the why? And why do the shells have the electron holding capacity of 2 8 and 32 electron holding capacity of 2 8 and 32 electron holding capacity of 2 8 and 32 and so on specifically? Let me deal with and so on specifically? Let me deal with and so on specifically? Let me deal with the electron shells first. See, if you the electron shells first. See, if you the electron shells first. See, if you accept that electrons are not only accept that electrons are not only accept that electrons are not only particles but also waves, then if they particles but also waves, then if they particles but also waves, then if they are waves bounded to a nucleus, that are waves bounded to a nucleus, that are waves bounded to a nucleus, that means that they must be standing waves. means that they must be standing waves. means that they must be standing waves. So you may be used to standing waves on So you may be used to standing waves on So you may be used to standing waves on a string. They don't seem to move a string. They don't seem to move a string. They don't seem to move anywhere. They just wiggle back and anywhere. They just wiggle back and anywhere. They just wiggle back and forth. Or you can have standing waves in forth. Or you can have standing waves in forth. Or you can have standing waves in two dimensions on a plate. And what you two dimensions on a plate. And what you two dimensions on a plate. And what you notice is that these standing waves take notice is that these standing waves take notice is that these standing waves take on particular stable patterns. So bound on particular stable patterns. So bound on particular stable patterns. So bound electrons are just standing waves in electrons are just standing waves in electrons are just standing waves in three dimensions. And the mathematical three dimensions. And the mathematical three dimensions. And the mathematical solutions are called the spherical solutions are called the spherical solutions are called the spherical harmonics. Because of the number of harmonics. Because of the number of harmonics. Because of the number of stable configurations you can have with stable configurations you can have with stable configurations you can have with growing amounts of angular momentum, growing amounts of angular momentum, growing amounts of angular momentum, there are different amounts of electrons there are different amounts of electrons there are different amounts of electrons which can fit into every state. And that which can fit into every state. And that which can fit into every state. And that goes with Pal's exclusion principle goes with Pal's exclusion principle goes with Pal's exclusion principle which says no two electrons can have the which says no two electrons can have the which says no two electrons can have the same state because they're same state because they're same state because they're so pointing so pointing so pointing electron waves and there are only electron waves and there are only electron waves and there are only certain of them which are stable which certain of them which are stable which certain of them which are stable which are possible which you can see in are possible which you can see in are possible which you can see in analogy to say vibrations in a plate. So analogy to say vibrations in a plate. So analogy to say vibrations in a plate. So why do atoms want the outer electron why do atoms want the outer electron why do atoms want the outer electron shell to be full? Well, this kind of shell to be full? Well, this kind of shell to be full? Well, this kind of minimizes the energy state of the whole minimizes the energy state of the whole minimizes the energy state of the whole system. So let's say you had two atoms. system. So let's say you had two atoms. system. So let's say you had two atoms. If you actually removed the electron off If you actually removed the electron off If you actually removed the electron off one atom and stuck it in the other, so one atom and stuck it in the other, so one atom and stuck it in the other, so that they both now had full shells, you that they both now had full shells, you that they both now had full shells, you would find that the total energy is now would find that the total energy is now would find that the total energy is now lower than it was before when the lower than it was before when the lower than it was before when the electrons were in their previous electrons were in their previous electrons were in their previous configurations. So the point is it's configurations. So the point is it's configurations. So the point is it's just like a ball rolling down a hill. just like a ball rolling down a hill. just like a ball rolling down a hill. It's that everything in nature wants to It's that everything in nature wants to It's that everything in nature wants to go to the lowest energy state. Why are go to the lowest energy state. Why are go to the lowest energy state. Why are the available frequencies of light the available frequencies of light the available frequencies of light continuous? I keep hearing that atoms continuous? I keep hearing that atoms continuous? I keep hearing that atoms absorb and emit photons of particular absorb and emit photons of particular absorb and emit photons of particular frequencies which correspond to the frequencies which correspond to the frequencies which correspond to the energy levels of their electrons. So energy levels of their electrons. So energy levels of their electrons. So where do all the other colors come from? where do all the other colors come from? where do all the other colors come from? Okay, it's true that atoms emit Okay, it's true that atoms emit Okay, it's true that atoms emit particular colors due to electrons particular colors due to electrons particular colors due to electrons jumping between certain allowed orbits jumping between certain allowed orbits jumping between certain allowed orbits around them. But we get different around them. But we get different around them. But we get different frequencies of light when these atoms frequencies of light when these atoms frequencies of light when these atoms bind up into molecules or even solids or bind up into molecules or even solids or bind up into molecules or even solids or when they form plasmas because then the when they form plasmas because then the when they form plasmas because then the charges are flying around all over the charges are flying around all over the charges are flying around all over the place. And in those cases, there's no place. And in those cases, there's no place. And in those cases, there's no longer these clearly defined energy longer these clearly defined energy longer these clearly defined energy levels for the electrons where they can levels for the electrons where they can levels for the electrons where they can jump and only produce certain distinct jump and only produce certain distinct jump and only produce certain distinct colors. Then there are whole bands of colors. Then there are whole bands of colors. Then there are whole bands of electron energy levels. So we can get a electron energy levels. So we can get a electron energy levels. So we can get a a real range of colors. So that's what a real range of colors. So that's what a real range of colors. So that's what we see from the sun or from hot solids. we see from the sun or from hot solids. we see from the sun or from hot solids. So that's why we get a continuous range So that's why we get a continuous range So that's why we get a continuous range of frequencies because the electron of frequencies because the electron of frequencies because the electron bands of energy allow virtually any bands of energy allow virtually any bands of energy allow virtually any transition. transition. transition. Derek, can I get a Veritassium shirt so Derek, can I get a Veritassium shirt so Derek, can I get a Veritassium shirt so I can look nearly as cool as you? I can look nearly as cool as you? I can look nearly as cool as you? It's funny you should mention that, It's funny you should mention that, It's funny you should mention that, Gray, because Veritassium actually now Gray, because Veritassium actually now Gray, because Veritassium actually now has a t-shirt. So if you want to get has a t-shirt. So if you want to get has a t-shirt. So if you want to get one, you can click on this shirt. Go one, you can click on this shirt. Go one, you can click on this shirt. Go ahead, click on it or click on the link ahead, click on it or click on the link ahead, click on it or click on the link in the description. For your viewers in the description. For your viewers in the description. For your viewers interested in pursuing a science career, interested in pursuing a science career, interested in pursuing a science career, what field do you think is going to be what field do you think is going to be what field do you think is going to be the most exciting in the coming the most exciting in the coming the most exciting in the coming centuries and why? Look, I can't say I centuries and why? Look, I can't say I centuries and why? Look, I can't say I know what fields of science are going to know what fields of science are going to know what fields of science are going to be important in the coming centuries, be important in the coming centuries, be important in the coming centuries, but at least in the coming decades, I but at least in the coming decades, I but at least in the coming decades, I would put my money on genetics. You would put my money on genetics. You would put my money on genetics. You know, if you think about the human know, if you think about the human know, if you think about the human genome project that took about 10 years genome project that took about 10 years genome project that took about 10 years and a billion dollars to to sequence one and a billion dollars to to sequence one and a billion dollars to to sequence one human genome and within the next couple human genome and within the next couple human genome and within the next couple years, you should be able to do it in a years, you should be able to do it in a years, you should be able to do it in a week for a hundred bucks. So, the pace week for a hundred bucks. So, the pace week for a hundred bucks. So, the pace of growth is simply extraordinary in of growth is simply extraordinary in of growth is simply extraordinary in that field of science. And that's why if that field of science. And that's why if that field of science. And that's why if I were going into science now, I might I were going into science now, I might I were going into science now, I might select that kind of field. Have you ever select that kind of field. Have you ever select that kind of field. Have you ever downloaded a book from audible.com? I downloaded a book from audible.com? I downloaded a book from audible.com? I have actually downloaded a book from have actually downloaded a book from have actually downloaded a book from audible.com. And I was listening to it audible.com. And I was listening to it audible.com. And I was listening to it on my most recent trip, which was handy on my most recent trip, which was handy on my most recent trip, which was handy because I was on this plane that didn't because I was on this plane that didn't because I was on this plane that didn't have an entertainment system and I was have an entertainment system and I was have an entertainment system and I was also listening to it in the airport. And also listening to it in the airport. And also listening to it in the airport. And I found it really a good way to pass the I found it really a good way to pass the I found it really a good way to pass the time. So if you're interested in time. So if you're interested in time. So if you're interested in downloading audiobooks, then you should downloading audiobooks, then you should downloading audiobooks, then you should probably try audible.com. And I have a probably try audible.com. And I have a probably try audible.com. And I have a book to recommend to you. It is Richard book to recommend to you. It is Richard book to recommend to you. It is Richard Dawkins book, The Selfish Gene. I read Dawkins book, The Selfish Gene. I read Dawkins book, The Selfish Gene. I read this a few years ago and I found it this a few years ago and I found it this a few years ago and I found it really enlightening, but I have a bit of really enlightening, but I have a bit of really enlightening, but I have a bit of a spoiler alert. Uh, well, not really a a spoiler alert. Uh, well, not really a a spoiler alert. Uh, well, not really a spoiler, more of a clarification on the spoiler, more of a clarification on the spoiler, more of a clarification on the title. I mean, it sounds like a book title. I mean, it sounds like a book title. I mean, it sounds like a book about a gene for being selfish, but about a gene for being selfish, but about a gene for being selfish, but that's not what it's actually about. that's not what it's actually about. that's not what it's actually about. What it's about is the fact that genes What it's about is the fact that genes What it's about is the fact that genes themselves act in selfish ways. And this themselves act in selfish ways. And this themselves act in selfish ways. And this I found a kind of enlightening I found a kind of enlightening I found a kind of enlightening revelation because if the genes are revelation because if the genes are revelation because if the genes are acting selfishly then the organism can acting selfishly then the organism can acting selfishly then the organism can act altruistically act altruistically act altruistically if you get what I mean. So if you if you get what I mean. So if you if you get what I mean. So if you haven't read that book or listened to it haven't read that book or listened to it haven't read that book or listened to it you should definitely check it out. And you should definitely check it out. And you should definitely check it out. And if you want to download it for free you if you want to download it for free you if you want to download it for free you can just go to audible.com/veritassium. can just go to audible.com/veritassium. can just go to audible.com/veritassium. You know I really want to thank You know I really want to thank You know I really want to thank audible.com for supporting me in this my audible.com for supporting me in this my audible.com for supporting me in this my 500,000th 500,000th 500,000th subscriber video. It really means a lot subscriber video. It really means a lot subscriber video. It really means a lot to have their support so I can keep to have their support so I can keep to have their support so I can keep going and hopefully get another 500,000. [Music] One last question, Derek. I'd like to One last question, Derek. I'd like to One last question, Derek. I'd like to know how, obeying the laws of physics, know how, obeying the laws of physics, know how, obeying the laws of physics, you ever manage to put these jeans