Title: Can You Perceive Acceleration
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YJbKieEC49M

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Have you ever considered how your eye Have you ever considered how your eye Have you ever considered how your eye scans across a landscape? I think most scans across a landscape? I think most scans across a landscape? I think most people assume that like a video camera, people assume that like a video camera, people assume that like a video camera, it pans smoothly across the scene. But I it pans smoothly across the scene. But I it pans smoothly across the scene. But I don't actually think that's what don't actually think that's what don't actually think that's what happens. In truth, I think the eye jumps happens. In truth, I think the eye jumps happens. In truth, I think the eye jumps from image to image as it moves across from image to image as it moves across from image to image as it moves across this scene. So, I'm going to try to find this scene. So, I'm going to try to find this scene. So, I'm going to try to find a volunteer to help me demonstrate that. a volunteer to help me demonstrate that. a volunteer to help me demonstrate that. What I'd like you to do is um scan What I'd like you to do is um scan What I'd like you to do is um scan across this landscape as smoothly as you across this landscape as smoothly as you across this landscape as smoothly as you can. You try that. Tell me about the process of scanning Tell me about the process of scanning Tell me about the process of scanning across, you know, from the point. across, you know, from the point. across, you know, from the point. It just feels like you're stopping and It just feels like you're stopping and It just feels like you're stopping and going and then like stopping and going going and then like stopping and going going and then like stopping and going and and and Yeah. It just feels like there's like Yeah. It just feels like there's like Yeah. It just feels like there's like there's a pause all the time constantly there's a pause all the time constantly there's a pause all the time constantly when you're going across. It's not like when you're going across. It's not like when you're going across. It's not like you're just looking straight across. you're just looking straight across. you're just looking straight across. Yeah. It's not smooth. Yeah. It's not smooth. Yeah. It's not smooth. The eye is capable of tracking smoothly. The eye is capable of tracking smoothly. The eye is capable of tracking smoothly. However, if something moves across your However, if something moves across your However, if something moves across your field of view, your eye can lock onto it field of view, your eye can lock onto it field of view, your eye can lock onto it and move smoothly with it. What I'd like and move smoothly with it. What I'd like and move smoothly with it. What I'd like to do is I'd like to repeat that little to do is I'd like to repeat that little to do is I'd like to repeat that little game, but I would like to ask you just game, but I would like to ask you just game, but I would like to ask you just to walk across on those rocks. to walk across on those rocks. to walk across on those rocks. Mhm. Mhm. Mhm. And then I'd like you to to like follow And then I'd like you to to like follow And then I'd like you to to like follow her along with your eyes. her along with your eyes. her along with your eyes. Okay. Okay. Okay. Is that possible? Is that possible? Is that possible? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Let's give it a shot. Do you want Okay. Let's give it a shot. Do you want Okay. Let's give it a shot. Do you want to go over there? to go over there? to go over there? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. All right. Go. Yeah. Go for it. Can I just get your reaction on on what Can I just get your reaction on on what Can I just get your reaction on on what that was like? How how was that the same that was like? How how was that the same that was like? How how was that the same or different? or different? or different? That felt a lot smoother because I was That felt a lot smoother because I was That felt a lot smoother because I was following something instead of just following something instead of just following something instead of just looking at something. looking at something. looking at something. Yeah. I don't know. Just like if you Yeah. I don't know. Just like if you Yeah. I don't know. Just like if you follow something, you're just your brain follow something, you're just your brain follow something, you're just your brain focuses on that one thing and you just focuses on that one thing and you just focuses on that one thing and you just kind of just go with it. kind of just go with it. kind of just go with it. Why would that be useful to be able to Why would that be useful to be able to Why would that be useful to be able to pan with a moving object? How does that affect our perception of How does that affect our perception of How does that affect our perception of motion? Well, I think it makes most motion? Well, I think it makes most motion? Well, I think it makes most motion seem quite smooth and makes it motion seem quite smooth and makes it motion seem quite smooth and makes it more difficult for us to determine when more difficult for us to determine when more difficult for us to determine when things are accelerating. things are accelerating. things are accelerating. One last question since I've got you One last question since I've got you One last question since I've got you guys here. So, what I want to do is I guys here. So, what I want to do is I guys here. So, what I want to do is I want to drop the ball. I want you guys want to drop the ball. I want you guys want to drop the ball. I want you guys to watch it and then tell me how the to watch it and then tell me how the to watch it and then tell me how the ball moved. ball moved. ball moved. Okay. Okay. Okay. Is that fair enough? Is that fair enough? Is that fair enough? So, you want us to watch it till it So, you want us to watch it till it So, you want us to watch it till it hits? hits? hits? Watch it till it hits the ground. Watch it till it hits the ground. Watch it till it hits the ground. And then afterwards, you're going to And then afterwards, you're going to And then afterwards, you're going to tell me how it moved. Okay. Three, tell me how it moved. Okay. Three, tell me how it moved. Okay. Three, two, one. two, one. two, one. I'll do I'll do it just one more. I'll do I'll do it just one more. I'll do I'll do it just one more. Three, two, one. Could you tell me about the motion of Could you tell me about the motion of Could you tell me about the motion of the ball? What was it doing as it went the ball? What was it doing as it went the ball? What was it doing as it went down? down? down? It's fast. It's fast. It's fast. Um, I don't know. It just seemed like it Um, I don't know. It just seemed like it Um, I don't know. It just seemed like it just dropped like it wasn't even moving. just dropped like it wasn't even moving. just dropped like it wasn't even moving. You just seen the ball dropped to the You just seen the ball dropped to the You just seen the ball dropped to the floor and that was it. floor and that was it. floor and that was it. You didn't see it like here. You just You didn't see it like here. You just You didn't see it like here. You just saw it from there to there. saw it from there to there. saw it from there to there. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Would Would you say its speed was Would Would you say its speed was Would Would you say its speed was constant or do you think its speed was constant or do you think its speed was constant or do you think its speed was changing? changing? changing? Constant. Constant. Constant. Yeah, it was the same. Yeah. Yeah, it was the same. Yeah. Yeah, it was the same. Yeah. The whole way down. The whole way down. The whole way down. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No acceleration. The goal of my whole No acceleration. The goal of my whole No acceleration. The goal of my whole experiment today, I'll let you guys in experiment today, I'll let you guys in experiment today, I'll let you guys in on the secret, is to point out that the on the secret, is to point out that the on the secret, is to point out that the eye tracks motion very smoothly. So, eye tracks motion very smoothly. So, eye tracks motion very smoothly. So, when the ball like goes down, it's when the ball like goes down, it's when the ball like goes down, it's really easy for us to track that. And it really easy for us to track that. And it really easy for us to track that. And it looks like it's just doing one constant looks like it's just doing one constant looks like it's just doing one constant thing. But in fact, it is speeding up thing. But in fact, it is speeding up thing. But in fact, it is speeding up the whole time. When I release it, it's the whole time. When I release it, it's the whole time. When I release it, it's not moving at all. And when it hits the not moving at all. And when it hits the not moving at all. And when it hits the ground, it's actually going quite fast. ground, it's actually going quite fast. ground, it's actually going quite fast. So, that that was kind of my point. If So, that that was kind of my point. If So, that that was kind of my point. If you scan across like a a stationary you scan across like a a stationary you scan across like a a stationary scene, then your eyes doing this weird scene, then your eyes doing this weird scene, then your eyes doing this weird jumpy thing. Yeah. jumpy thing. Yeah. jumpy thing. Yeah. But then if you're actually moving with But then if you're actually moving with But then if you're actually moving with an object or a person or something, then an object or a person or something, then an object or a person or something, then your eyes are so smooth that you don't your eyes are so smooth that you don't your eyes are so smooth that you don't evenice. evenice. evenice. Yeah. But something that's still and you Yeah. But something that's still and you Yeah. But something that's still and you have to move, that's when it starts to have to move, that's when it starts to have to move, that's when it starts to jump. But if it's something moving, your jump. But if it's something moving, your jump. But if it's something moving, your eyes have to follow that. It's much eyes have to follow that. It's much eyes have to follow that. It's much easier. Yeah.