Title: Cathode Rays Lead to Thomson's Model of the Atom
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2xKZRpAsWL8

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en so today and i'm at the University of Sydney with Doctor Phil Dooley and we're talking about how our idea of the atom changed from a tiny little hard sphere to something more complicated And this apparatus has something to do with that Phil: exactly, exactly it was quite a the landmark historical experiment it's just made of a tube of glass connected to a a vacuum pump and in the tube of glass there are two pieces of metal connected to high-voltage power supply so we can suck the air out of here Phil: that's right and then apply a high voltage two metal plates Phil: yes Normally with high voltage in air we don't get anything except maybe a big spark but what we what Geissler found who did this in 1857 was something quite different so shall we have a look? Derek: let's do it Phil: ok, let's turn on the pump and the high volts turn off the lights so we can see what's going on as you can see something's happening now yes I see a bit of a pink glow in there. Phil: that's right so imagine Geissler, the first person to ever see this, it's pretty surprising that started people thinking 'what is the stuff that's coming from the cathode?' There seems to be a ray emitted from this negatively charged one which they called the cathode so therefore it's called a cathode ray and it became the topic for research for the next forty years since all the big big wigs of physics in science basically tried to work at what was going on So what did they figure out? I mean what is going on? What's producing this glow here there were two main camps one thought that it was waves and the second thought that the electricity was being carried by a stream of charged particles. Over the next forty years they basically came to the conclusion - well it was JJ Thomson in eigteen ninety seven who came up with the idea that uh... there is a stream of very small charged particles uh... negatively charged they're smaller than an atom so the smallest atom a hydrogen atom they're about one thousandth of the size of that and it doesn't matter what material it - the metal is it's always the same particle, so this particle appears to be in everything and this electron as it was as knownn is what's carrying the electricity so Thomson came to the conclusion that all atoms have this particle as one of their constituents that's right, that's right so it wasn't a billiard ball, there had to be something inside the billiard ball so how do I picture like a billiard ball with bits inside it? Phil: Well you should probably think about a pudding A pudding? Phil: Yeah well that's what his idea was, that it was a plum pudding very dear to every British person's heart Derek: right Phil: and inside the putting you have plums and plums can come out of that so when you apply high voltage then a negatively charged electron which thompson pictured as a plum comes out and leaves behind positively charged putting are you a fan of plum pudding? For research purposes definitely All right, let's see if we can research this a little further sounds like fun