Title: Chain Drop Answer 2
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X-QFAB0gEtE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en All right, are you ready for the moment All right, are you ready for the moment All right, are you ready for the moment of truth? Let's drop these two objects of truth? Let's drop these two objects of truth? Let's drop these two objects at exactly the same time and see which at exactly the same time and see which at exactly the same time and see which one hits the ground first. Ready? Three, one hits the ground first. Ready? Three, one hits the ground first. Ready? Three, two, one. Wow. Did you see that? The one connected Wow. Did you see that? The one connected Wow. Did you see that? The one connected to the chain landed just before the to the chain landed just before the to the chain landed just before the other free weight. I'd like to show this other free weight. I'd like to show this other free weight. I'd like to show this in slow motion so you can see that the in slow motion so you can see that the in slow motion so you can see that the weights are accelerating at just weights are accelerating at just weights are accelerating at just slightly different rates. Heat. Heat. [music] [music] Why did that happen? I mean, most Why did that happen? I mean, most Why did that happen? I mean, most people, most students of physics would people, most students of physics would people, most students of physics would know that all objects on Earth's surface know that all objects on Earth's surface know that all objects on Earth's surface should accelerate down at the same rate, should accelerate down at the same rate, should accelerate down at the same rate, 9.8 meters/s squared. But in this case, 9.8 meters/s squared. But in this case, 9.8 meters/s squared. But in this case, what happens is the chain actually whips what happens is the chain actually whips what happens is the chain actually whips the weight around. So it accelerates at the weight around. So it accelerates at the weight around. So it accelerates at a rate greater than the acceleration of a rate greater than the acceleration of a rate greater than the acceleration of objects when in freef fall. That's a objects when in freef fall. That's a objects when in freef fall. That's a pretty remarkable result. I want you to pretty remarkable result. I want you to pretty remarkable result. I want you to think about the bend in the chain. As think about the bend in the chain. As think about the bend in the chain. As the weight descends, the chain goes from the weight descends, the chain goes from the weight descends, the chain goes from falling to becoming stationary. So it's falling to becoming stationary. So it's falling to becoming stationary. So it's accelerating up. The tension required to accelerating up. The tension required to accelerating up. The tension required to accelerate the chain up actually pulls accelerate the chain up actually pulls accelerate the chain up actually pulls down on the weight, accelerating it at a down on the weight, accelerating it at a down on the weight, accelerating it at a rate greater than the acceleration due rate greater than the acceleration due rate greater than the acceleration due to gravity. and that's why it hits the to gravity. and that's why it hits the to gravity. and that's why it hits the ground first. Now, this actually happens ground first. Now, this actually happens ground first. Now, this actually happens to bungee jumpers. If the weight of the to bungee jumpers. If the weight of the to bungee jumpers. If the weight of the rope is appreciable, they will actually rope is appreciable, they will actually rope is appreciable, they will actually accelerate down at a rate faster than accelerate down at a rate faster than accelerate down at a rate faster than freef fall, faster than 9.8 m/s squared. freef fall, faster than 9.8 m/s squared. freef fall, faster than 9.8 m/s squared. When I went bungee jumping, I was aware When I went bungee jumping, I was aware When I went bungee jumping, I was aware of this. What is actually true is that of this. What is actually true is that of this. What is actually true is that as you fall, your acceleration will be as you fall, your acceleration will be as you fall, your acceleration will be greater than free fall. And that's due greater than free fall. And that's due greater than free fall. And that's due to some uh effects of the the way the to some uh effects of the the way the to some uh effects of the the way the rope pulls on you. So, I'll do an rope pulls on you. So, I'll do an rope pulls on you. So, I'll do an explanation of that later when I'm not explanation of that later when I'm not explanation of that later when I'm not scared out of my mind. scared out of my mind. scared out of my mind. 3 2 1 Oh my god. 3 2 1 Oh my god. 3 2 1 Oh my god. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] [screaming] I couldn't figure out what the I couldn't figure out what the I couldn't figure out what the acceleration was as I was going down, acceleration was as I was going down, acceleration was as I was going down, but you know, it felt high. It felt very but you know, it felt high. It felt very but you know, it felt high. It felt very fast. Very great increase in in your fast. Very great increase in in your fast. Very great increase in in your rate of speed. So, rate of speed. So, rate of speed. So, oh my god, that was fast. oh my god, that was fast. oh my god, that was fast. Loved it.