Title: Do Cell Phones Cause Brain Tumors
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wU5XkhUGzBs

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] Do cell phones cause brain cancer? Do cell phones cause brain cancer? Do cell phones cause brain cancer? Oh, that's a good one. I reckon they do. Oh, that's a good one. I reckon they do. Oh, that's a good one. I reckon they do. Yeah, Yeah, Yeah, if you're on them a lot, yes, if you're on them a lot, yes, if you're on them a lot, yes, it can't be good for you. it can't be good for you. it can't be good for you. I did decide to stop, you know, putting I did decide to stop, you know, putting I did decide to stop, you know, putting the uh the phone whilst I'm driving in the uh the phone whilst I'm driving in the uh the phone whilst I'm driving in my groin and start moving it over there my groin and start moving it over there my groin and start moving it over there in case it's going to cause testicular in case it's going to cause testicular in case it's going to cause testicular cancer. My doctor advised me on this. cancer. My doctor advised me on this. cancer. My doctor advised me on this. Now, it doesn't seem to make sense that Now, it doesn't seem to make sense that Now, it doesn't seem to make sense that cell phones should cause cancer because cell phones should cause cancer because cell phones should cause cancer because the radiation they emit is nonionizing, the radiation they emit is nonionizing, the radiation they emit is nonionizing, which means it doesn't have enough which means it doesn't have enough which means it doesn't have enough energy to rip electrons off atoms or energy to rip electrons off atoms or energy to rip electrons off atoms or molecules and destroy DNA. So, how would molecules and destroy DNA. So, how would molecules and destroy DNA. So, how would cell phones cause this type of cancer in cell phones cause this type of cancer in cell phones cause this type of cancer in the the the I don't know, man. That's that's black I don't know, man. That's that's black I don't know, man. That's that's black magic to me. magic to me. magic to me. The radiation from cell phones is almost The radiation from cell phones is almost The radiation from cell phones is almost identical to the radiation inside a identical to the radiation inside a identical to the radiation inside a microwave. The wavelengths are almost microwave. The wavelengths are almost microwave. The wavelengths are almost the same, about 15 cm long. Basically the same, about 15 cm long. Basically the same, about 15 cm long. Basically the same size as your phone. the same size as your phone. the same size as your phone. All I know is microwaves, they like heat All I know is microwaves, they like heat All I know is microwaves, they like heat food up and like they fry they fry like food up and like they fry they fry like food up and like they fry they fry like living stuff, living organisms. So maybe living stuff, living organisms. So maybe living stuff, living organisms. So maybe it would fry your brain. it would fry your brain. it would fry your brain. Barbecuing my brain slowly. Barbecuing my brain slowly. Barbecuing my brain slowly. This led to various internet videos This led to various internet videos This led to various internet videos where cell phones were shown popping where cell phones were shown popping where cell phones were shown popping popcorn or cooking eggs. Now, that is popcorn or cooking eggs. Now, that is popcorn or cooking eggs. Now, that is obviously impossible because the amount obviously impossible because the amount obviously impossible because the amount of power in a microwave is over a of power in a microwave is over a of power in a microwave is over a thousand times the power of radiation of thousand times the power of radiation of thousand times the power of radiation of microwaves emitted from your cell phone. microwaves emitted from your cell phone. microwaves emitted from your cell phone. Would you be concerned about living near Would you be concerned about living near Would you be concerned about living near a cell phone tower? Do you think that's a cell phone tower? Do you think that's a cell phone tower? Do you think that's worse than worse than worse than Yeah, literally right next to it? Yeah, Yeah, literally right next to it? Yeah, Yeah, literally right next to it? Yeah, I have concerns about it. Definitely. I have concerns about it. Definitely. I have concerns about it. Definitely. But the truth is this. If you live in an But the truth is this. If you live in an But the truth is this. If you live in an area with better reception, that means area with better reception, that means area with better reception, that means your phone has to emit less microwaves your phone has to emit less microwaves your phone has to emit less microwaves in order to transmit to the tower. So, in order to transmit to the tower. So, in order to transmit to the tower. So, you're actually exposed to lower levels you're actually exposed to lower levels you're actually exposed to lower levels of microwave radiation living near a of microwave radiation living near a of microwave radiation living near a tower than living far from it. However, tower than living far from it. However, tower than living far from it. However, there have been some scientific studies there have been some scientific studies there have been some scientific studies that show very high level microwaves that show very high level microwaves that show very high level microwaves like those from a mobile phone can cause like those from a mobile phone can cause like those from a mobile phone can cause heat shock proteins to be released heat shock proteins to be released heat shock proteins to be released inside the body. And it's thought that inside the body. And it's thought that inside the body. And it's thought that that could be related to the onset of that could be related to the onset of that could be related to the onset of cancer. So perhaps there is a reason to cancer. So perhaps there is a reason to cancer. So perhaps there is a reason to study the biological effects of cell study the biological effects of cell study the biological effects of cell phones on people. What would happen if a phones on people. What would happen if a phones on people. What would happen if a study came out saying that you were two study came out saying that you were two study came out saying that you were two or three times as likely to develop a or three times as likely to develop a or three times as likely to develop a brain tumor if you used a mobile phone brain tumor if you used a mobile phone brain tumor if you used a mobile phone regularly? Would that change? regularly? Would that change? regularly? Would that change? Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. Use two to three times is just massive. Use two to three times is just massive. Use two to three times is just massive. Like I know it's a slim odd, but still Like I know it's a slim odd, but still Like I know it's a slim odd, but still the the chances are like you don't want the the chances are like you don't want the the chances are like you don't want that to happen to anyone, let alone that to happen to anyone, let alone that to happen to anyone, let alone yourself. So it definitely not use it as yourself. So it definitely not use it as yourself. So it definitely not use it as much. much. much. What if I told you that a study has come What if I told you that a study has come What if I told you that a study has come out that says over long periods of time out that says over long periods of time out that says over long periods of time there's a three-fold increase in brain there's a three-fold increase in brain there's a three-fold increase in brain tumors? A recently published Swedish tumors? A recently published Swedish tumors? A recently published Swedish study found that cell phone users were study found that cell phone users were study found that cell phone users were 30% more likely to develop gloma. That's 30% more likely to develop gloma. That's 30% more likely to develop gloma. That's the most common form of malignant brain the most common form of malignant brain the most common form of malignant brain cancer. And it gets worse. Those people cancer. And it gets worse. Those people cancer. And it gets worse. Those people who' used a cell phone for over 25 years who' used a cell phone for over 25 years who' used a cell phone for over 25 years had a three-fold increase in this type had a three-fold increase in this type had a three-fold increase in this type of cancer. Due to studies like that one of cancer. Due to studies like that one of cancer. Due to studies like that one and expert opinion, the World Health and expert opinion, the World Health and expert opinion, the World Health Organization actually classified cell Organization actually classified cell Organization actually classified cell phone radiation as possibly carcinogenic phone radiation as possibly carcinogenic phone radiation as possibly carcinogenic to humans. But now consider that brain to humans. But now consider that brain to humans. But now consider that brain cancers are exceedingly rare. In any cancers are exceedingly rare. In any cancers are exceedingly rare. In any given year, you have a three in 100,000 given year, you have a three in 100,000 given year, you have a three in 100,000 chance of developing a gloma. Now, chance of developing a gloma. Now, chance of developing a gloma. Now, according to the Swedish study, according to the Swedish study, according to the Swedish study, long-term cell phone use can increase long-term cell phone use can increase long-term cell phone use can increase that risk up to 9 in 100,000. Still a that risk up to 9 in 100,000. Still a that risk up to 9 in 100,000. Still a very small risk, but a significant very small risk, but a significant very small risk, but a significant increase. Now, given the scarcity of increase. Now, given the scarcity of increase. Now, given the scarcity of brain cancers, how can they really brain cancers, how can they really brain cancers, how can they really quantify this risk? quantify this risk? quantify this risk? The ideal way to do the experiment would The ideal way to do the experiment would The ideal way to do the experiment would be to perform a randomized control be to perform a randomized control be to perform a randomized control trial, which is where you get a group of trial, which is where you get a group of trial, which is where you get a group of people who don't use cell phones, people who don't use cell phones, people who don't use cell phones, randomly give half of them cell phones, randomly give half of them cell phones, randomly give half of them cell phones, and force the other half to live and force the other half to live and force the other half to live without. Then follow them for 15 to 20 without. Then follow them for 15 to 20 without. Then follow them for 15 to 20 years and see how many in each group years and see how many in each group years and see how many in each group develop go. Oh, and you would need develop go. Oh, and you would need develop go. Oh, and you would need hundreds of thousands, if not millions hundreds of thousands, if not millions hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people, to take part because of just of people, to take part because of just of people, to take part because of just how rare brain tumors are. And how rare brain tumors are. And how rare brain tumors are. And immediately you can spot the problem immediately you can spot the problem immediately you can spot the problem with this experimental design. Virtually with this experimental design. Virtually with this experimental design. Virtually everyone already has a cell phone. I everyone already has a cell phone. I everyone already has a cell phone. I mean, there are more mobile devices than mean, there are more mobile devices than mean, there are more mobile devices than there are people on Earth. More people there are people on Earth. More people there are people on Earth. More people have access to a cell phone than to a have access to a cell phone than to a have access to a cell phone than to a working toilet. working toilet. working toilet. So, the next best way to do the So, the next best way to do the So, the next best way to do the experiment would be to perform a experiment would be to perform a experiment would be to perform a prospective observational study in which prospective observational study in which prospective observational study in which you gather a group of people and follow you gather a group of people and follow you gather a group of people and follow them over a period of decades monitoring them over a period of decades monitoring them over a period of decades monitoring their cell phone use. And then you find their cell phone use. And then you find their cell phone use. And then you find out how many develop go and correlate out how many develop go and correlate out how many develop go and correlate that with their cell phone usage. The that with their cell phone usage. The that with their cell phone usage. The problem is people who use their cell problem is people who use their cell problem is people who use their cell phones a lot may differ in other ways phones a lot may differ in other ways phones a lot may differ in other ways than just their cell phone use. Plus, than just their cell phone use. Plus, than just their cell phone use. Plus, there's the problem of scale. Even if there's the problem of scale. Even if there's the problem of scale. Even if you followed around 50,000 people for 10 you followed around 50,000 people for 10 you followed around 50,000 people for 10 years, you'd only expect to observe 20 years, you'd only expect to observe 20 years, you'd only expect to observe 20 glomomas. And that's not nearly enough glomomas. And that's not nearly enough glomomas. And that's not nearly enough to detect a difference between the to detect a difference between the to detect a difference between the groups. So the third way to do the groups. So the third way to do the groups. So the third way to do the experiment is to perform a case control experiment is to perform a case control experiment is to perform a case control study where you collect a group of study where you collect a group of study where you collect a group of people who have brain tumors. Those are people who have brain tumors. Those are people who have brain tumors. Those are the cases. And you find a the cases. And you find a the cases. And you find a demographically very similar group who demographically very similar group who demographically very similar group who don't have brain tumors. Those are the don't have brain tumors. Those are the don't have brain tumors. Those are the controls. And then you ask them about controls. And then you ask them about controls. And then you ask them about their behaviors over the previous decade their behaviors over the previous decade their behaviors over the previous decade and see if they differ marketkedly and see if they differ marketkedly and see if they differ marketkedly between the groups. For example, do the between the groups. For example, do the between the groups. For example, do the brain tumor cases use their phones a lot brain tumor cases use their phones a lot brain tumor cases use their phones a lot more than the controls? The Swedish more than the controls? The Swedish more than the controls? The Swedish study was one of these large-scale case study was one of these large-scale case study was one of these large-scale case control studies. But there is a question control studies. But there is a question control studies. But there is a question about whether this study was about whether this study was about whether this study was methodologically flawed. In hindsight, methodologically flawed. In hindsight, methodologically flawed. In hindsight, if you get a brain tumor, you might if you get a brain tumor, you might if you get a brain tumor, you might remember using your phone more remember using your phone more remember using your phone more than you did. And if you don't have a than you did. And if you don't have a than you did. And if you don't have a brain tumor, you might remember using it brain tumor, you might remember using it brain tumor, you might remember using it less. Now, there have been a few less. Now, there have been a few less. Now, there have been a few prospective studies completed, including prospective studies completed, including prospective studies completed, including one in Denmark, using almost the entire one in Denmark, using almost the entire one in Denmark, using almost the entire Danish population and records from their Danish population and records from their Danish population and records from their cell phone companies, and they found no cell phone companies, and they found no cell phone companies, and they found no link between cell phone usage and link between cell phone usage and link between cell phone usage and incidents of brain cancer. Another incidents of brain cancer. Another incidents of brain cancer. Another perspective study using almost 1 million perspective study using almost 1 million perspective study using almost 1 million women in the UK again found no link. women in the UK again found no link. women in the UK again found no link. So, what are we supposed to believe So, what are we supposed to believe So, what are we supposed to believe then? then? then? What are we supposed to believe? This is What are we supposed to believe? This is What are we supposed to believe? This is where I think we really need to figure where I think we really need to figure where I think we really need to figure out the right methodology out the right methodology out the right methodology to look at it. And here's the thing, to look at it. And here's the thing, to look at it. And here's the thing, right? Over the last 15 to 20 years, right? Over the last 15 to 20 years, right? Over the last 15 to 20 years, almost everyone has used a mobile phone. almost everyone has used a mobile phone. almost everyone has used a mobile phone. Mobile phone use has gone way up. Mobile phone use has gone way up. Mobile phone use has gone way up. Everyone's got one. Everyone's got one. Everyone's got one. So, you can look at the actual brain So, you can look at the actual brain So, you can look at the actual brain cancer rates on the overall population. cancer rates on the overall population. cancer rates on the overall population. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And if there is a link, you would expect And if there is a link, you would expect And if there is a link, you would expect that to be going up. that to be going up. that to be going up. Is it? Is it? Is it? It is not. It is not. It is not. It is not. Okay. It is not. Okay. It is not. Okay. If the results of the Swedish study were If the results of the Swedish study were If the results of the Swedish study were correct, then the rates of gloma would correct, then the rates of gloma would correct, then the rates of gloma would be more than 40% higher than they are. be more than 40% higher than they are. be more than 40% higher than they are. So, it is extremely unlikely that cell So, it is extremely unlikely that cell So, it is extremely unlikely that cell phones actually cause brain cancer. And phones actually cause brain cancer. And phones actually cause brain cancer. And if they do, either the effects take if they do, either the effects take if they do, either the effects take decades to show or the increase in risk decades to show or the increase in risk decades to show or the increase in risk is very, very small. is very, very small. is very, very small. Hello. Hey. So, if you're looking for more ways Hey. So, if you're looking for more ways Hey. So, if you're looking for more ways to use your smartphone, maybe you should to use your smartphone, maybe you should to use your smartphone, maybe you should try audiobooks. Audible.com is a leading try audiobooks. Audible.com is a leading try audiobooks. Audible.com is a leading provider of audiobooks with over 150,000 provider of audiobooks with over 150,000 provider of audiobooks with over 150,000 titles in all areas of literature titles in all areas of literature titles in all areas of literature including fiction, non-fiction, and including fiction, non-fiction, and including fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. Now, this week I wanted to periodicals. Now, this week I wanted to periodicals. Now, this week I wanted to recommend a book which had an impact on recommend a book which had an impact on recommend a book which had an impact on my life. It is called The E-Myth by my life. It is called The E-Myth by my life. It is called The E-Myth by Michael E. Gerber. It's a business book Michael E. Gerber. It's a business book Michael E. Gerber. It's a business book about why a lot of small businesses about why a lot of small businesses about why a lot of small businesses fail. It's because they have this myth fail. It's because they have this myth fail. It's because they have this myth at their core. The E-Myth is the at their core. The E-Myth is the at their core. The E-Myth is the entrepreneurial myth that if you know entrepreneurial myth that if you know entrepreneurial myth that if you know how to do something, for example, make how to do something, for example, make how to do something, for example, make videos, then you know how to make a videos, then you know how to make a videos, then you know how to make a business that does that thing, for business that does that thing, for business that does that thing, for example, make a video production example, make a video production example, make a video production business. That is just not the case. And business. That is just not the case. And business. That is just not the case. And I think the way that Michael Gerber I think the way that Michael Gerber I think the way that Michael Gerber approaches this subject from the myth approaches this subject from the myth approaches this subject from the myth forward, uh, you know, very much forward, uh, you know, very much forward, uh, you know, very much emulates what I did with my PhD thesis emulates what I did with my PhD thesis emulates what I did with my PhD thesis and what I do now on YouTube in the way and what I do now on YouTube in the way and what I do now on YouTube in the way I teach. And I found it also a very I teach. And I found it also a very I teach. And I found it also a very effective way to learn about making my effective way to learn about making my effective way to learn about making my own business. So, if you are thinking own business. So, if you are thinking own business. So, if you are thinking about starting your own business, then I about starting your own business, then I about starting your own business, then I would highly, highly recommend this would highly, highly recommend this would highly, highly recommend this book. And in fact, you can download it book. And in fact, you can download it book. And in fact, you can download it for free by going to for free by going to for free by going to audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. Or you can pick any other book of your Or you can pick any other book of your Or you can pick any other book of your choosing for a one month free trial. So, choosing for a one month free trial. So, choosing for a one month free trial. So, I really want to thank Audible for I really want to thank Audible for I really want to thank Audible for supporting me and I want to thank you supporting me and I want to thank you supporting me and I want to thank you for watching.