Title: Epic Slow-Mo Drum Implosions!
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xmYss_hNF4Q

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, a while back I did an imploding drum So, a while back I did an imploding drum So, a while back I did an imploding drum experiment, but at the time I didn't experiment, but at the time I didn't experiment, but at the time I didn't have a very good high-speed camera. And have a very good high-speed camera. And have a very good high-speed camera. And so, I use something called optical flow so, I use something called optical flow so, I use something called optical flow to interpolate between the frames. And to interpolate between the frames. And to interpolate between the frames. And basically, it just tries to add in what basically, it just tries to add in what basically, it just tries to add in what must have happened. But since it doesn't must have happened. But since it doesn't must have happened. But since it doesn't actually capture what happened, you can actually capture what happened, you can actually capture what happened, you can see that it actually warps the frame and see that it actually warps the frame and see that it actually warps the frame and looks really weird and unrealistic. So, looks really weird and unrealistic. So, looks really weird and unrealistic. So, I've come down to the Questicon Science I've come down to the Questicon Science I've come down to the Questicon Science Center in CRA and I'm going to shoot Center in CRA and I'm going to shoot Center in CRA and I'm going to shoot this again with their amazing high-speed this again with their amazing high-speed this again with their amazing high-speed 12200 frames per second. Okay, we've got 12200 frames per second. Okay, we've got 12200 frames per second. Okay, we've got steam billowing out of the drum. So, steam billowing out of the drum. So, steam billowing out of the drum. So, it's totally full of water vapor at the it's totally full of water vapor at the it's totally full of water vapor at the moment. Now, I'm going to take it off moment. Now, I'm going to take it off moment. Now, I'm going to take it off the heating element. the heating element. the heating element. Now, we're going to cool down all that Now, we're going to cool down all that Now, we're going to cool down all that water in there, which is going to cause water in there, which is going to cause water in there, which is going to cause it to condense. As it condenses, it's it to condense. As it condenses, it's it to condense. As it condenses, it's going to create a vacuum in there, which going to create a vacuum in there, which going to create a vacuum in there, which hopefully will get it to implode. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. Oh, Oh, Oh, [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] yeah. [music] [music] [music] A lot of people think this experiment is A lot of people think this experiment is A lot of people think this experiment is just about showing [music] the power of just about showing [music] the power of just about showing [music] the power of the atmosphere. here. But I think the atmosphere. here. But I think the atmosphere. here. But I think there's a more important consequence. It there's a more important consequence. It there's a more important consequence. It explains why at a a power station, for explains why at a a power station, for explains why at a a power station, for example, you need to cool the steam as example, you need to cool the steam as example, you need to cool the steam as it comes out of the exit. To turn over a it comes out of the exit. To turn over a it comes out of the exit. To turn over a turbine, you have to get very hot steam. turbine, you have to get very hot steam. turbine, you have to get very hot steam. And everyone appreciates the steam needs And everyone appreciates the steam needs And everyone appreciates the steam needs to be incredibly hot, as hot as you can to be incredibly hot, as hot as you can to be incredibly hot, as hot as you can make it. But on the other side of the make it. But on the other side of the make it. But on the other side of the turbine, you need to use a condenser to turbine, you need to use a condenser to turbine, you need to use a condenser to cool down that steam. And this is why, cool down that steam. And this is why, cool down that steam. And this is why, because that creates this big suction. because that creates this big suction. because that creates this big suction. So, not only do you heat up the steam so So, not only do you heat up the steam so So, not only do you heat up the steam so it pushes over the turbine, you also it pushes over the turbine, you also it pushes over the turbine, you also need to cool it down when it's gone need to cool it down when it's gone need to cool it down when it's gone through the turbine. So, you have a big through the turbine. So, you have a big through the turbine. So, you have a big change in energy, and that is what turns change in energy, and that is what turns change in energy, and that is what turns the turbine over. [music] Now, of the turbine over. [music] Now, of the turbine over. [music] Now, of course, suction is just the word we use course, suction is just the word we use course, suction is just the word we use when a fluid flows from an area of when a fluid flows from an area of when a fluid flows from an area of higher pressure into an area of lower higher pressure into an area of lower higher pressure into an area of lower pressure, which you'd know if you've pressure, which you'd know if you've pressure, which you'd know if you've seen Vsauce's video on the space straw. seen Vsauce's video on the space straw. seen Vsauce's video on the space straw. The lowest pressure you can get in a gas The lowest pressure you can get in a gas The lowest pressure you can get in a gas is [music] zero, a perfect vacuum. But is [music] zero, a perfect vacuum. But is [music] zero, a perfect vacuum. But you can actually get negative pressures you can actually get negative pressures you can actually get negative pressures [music] if the fluid is a liquid and [music] if the fluid is a liquid and [music] if the fluid is a liquid and it's inside a tree. Now that's real it's inside a tree. Now that's real it's inside a tree. Now that's real suction. So click on the link in the suction. So click on the link in the suction. So click on the link in the description if you want to learn more. description if you want to learn more. description if you want to learn more. So that 20 L drum was good, but perhaps So that 20 L drum was good, but perhaps So that 20 L drum was good, but perhaps this 200 L drum will be better. But the this 200 L drum will be better. But the this 200 L drum will be better. But the question is, will it implode? I want you question is, will it implode? I want you question is, will it implode? I want you to place your bets now. Uh we have two to place your bets now. Uh we have two to place your bets now. Uh we have two gas heaters, you can see heating up this gas heaters, you can see heating up this gas heaters, you can see heating up this drum. It's uh pretty hot. We have a bit drum. It's uh pretty hot. We have a bit drum. It's uh pretty hot. We have a bit of steam coming out the top as you can of steam coming out the top as you can of steam coming out the top as you can see there. In a moment, we're going to see there. In a moment, we're going to see there. In a moment, we're going to pull it off these gas burners, seal it pull it off these gas burners, seal it pull it off these gas burners, seal it up, and start cooling it down with up, and start cooling it down with up, and start cooling it down with water. The water vapor inside will water. The water vapor inside will water. The water vapor inside will condense, and we will see if the condense, and we will see if the condense, and we will see if the atmosphere can crush it. I'm cautiously atmosphere can crush it. I'm cautiously atmosphere can crush it. I'm cautiously optimistic. [music] [music] Round objects are incredibly strong Round objects are incredibly strong Round objects are incredibly strong under compression, as Destin showed us under compression, as Destin showed us under compression, as Destin showed us with Prince Rupert's drop. But if you with Prince Rupert's drop. But if you with Prince Rupert's drop. But if you create just a little ding in a round create just a little ding in a round create just a little ding in a round object, it should significantly weaken object, it should significantly weaken object, it should significantly weaken the structure. And that's what the the structure. And that's what the the structure. And that's what the hammer is for. hammer is for. hammer is for. All right, let's whack it. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] Well, that's how it should work in Well, that's how it should work in Well, that's how it should work in theory anyway. Underwhelming science. There we go. [music] [music] [music] [music] The implosion happens so fast in just The implosion happens so fast in just The implosion happens so fast in just 25,000 of a [music] second that the 25,000 of a [music] second that the 25,000 of a [music] second that the water on the left hand side of the drum water on the left hand side of the drum water on the left hand side of the drum can't keep up. Have a [music] look. [music] A human blink takes about 100 A human blink takes about 100 A human blink takes about 100 milliseconds. That's [music] four times milliseconds. That's [music] four times milliseconds. That's [music] four times the time it took for the drum to the time it took for the drum to the time it took for the drum to implode. So, it's literally blink and implode. So, it's literally blink and implode. So, it's literally blink and [music] you'll miss it. So, there we go. [music] you'll miss it. So, there we go. [music] you'll miss it. So, there we go. We showed that the atmosphere is We showed that the atmosphere is We showed that the atmosphere is powerful enough to crumple even this powerful enough to crumple even this powerful enough to crumple even this very thick, very thick, very thick, very big drum. When we later measured, very big drum. When we later measured, very big drum. When we later measured, we found that the drum had crumpled into we found that the drum had crumpled into we found that the drum had crumpled into [music] a perfect equilateral prism. [music] a perfect equilateral prism. [music] a perfect equilateral prism. Which might not surprise you if unlike Which might not surprise you if unlike Which might not surprise you if unlike Viheart, you prefer your maths potatoes Viheart, you prefer your maths potatoes Viheart, you prefer your maths potatoes with a minimum amount of gravy. You see, with a minimum amount of gravy. You see, with a minimum amount of gravy. You see, for a given perimeter, the equilateral for a given perimeter, the equilateral for a given perimeter, the equilateral triangle encloses the minimum amount of triangle encloses the minimum amount of triangle encloses the minimum amount of area of any regular polygon. So, the area of any regular polygon. So, the area of any regular polygon. So, the drum was optimizing to make the minimum drum was optimizing to make the minimum drum was optimizing to make the minimum volume in its interior, which is what volume in its interior, which is what volume in its interior, which is what you'd expect cuz there's a vacuum in you'd expect cuz there's a vacuum in you'd expect cuz there's a vacuum in there. Isn't that awesome? That is there. Isn't that awesome? That is there. Isn't that awesome? That is awesome. [sighs] That feels good. Now you may have noticed that the big Now you may have noticed that the big Now you may have noticed that the big drum crumpled into an equilateral prism drum crumpled into an equilateral prism drum crumpled into an equilateral prism whereas the smaller drum crumpled into whereas the smaller drum crumpled into whereas the smaller drum crumpled into something resembling a hexagon. So the something resembling a hexagon. So the something resembling a hexagon. So the question is why were they crumpled in question is why were they crumpled in question is why were they crumpled in different ways? I mean one thing I was different ways? I mean one thing I was different ways? I mean one thing I was thinking was that perhaps they were thinking was that perhaps they were thinking was that perhaps they were created in different ways. So maybe they created in different ways. So maybe they created in different ways. So maybe they were welded in different points and that were welded in different points and that were welded in different points and that explains the structure that we saw. But explains the structure that we saw. But explains the structure that we saw. But I'd like to hear your thoughts. Why do I'd like to hear your thoughts. Why do I'd like to hear your thoughts. Why do you think we saw these different you think we saw these different you think we saw these different crumpling patterns? I mean, obviously crumpling patterns? I mean, obviously crumpling patterns? I mean, obviously things with three corners are generally things with three corners are generally things with three corners are generally quite stable. So that may explain also quite stable. So that may explain also quite stable. So that may explain also why it crumpled just to a a triangular why it crumpled just to a a triangular why it crumpled just to a a triangular prism. But I'd like to hear what you prism. But I'd like to hear what you prism. But I'd like to hear what you have to say. So, let me know in the have to say. So, let me know in the have to say. So, let me know in the comments.