Title: Fire Syringe
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4qe1Ueifekg

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, uh, Nigel, what have we got here? So, uh, Nigel, what have we got here? So, uh, Nigel, what have we got here? We've got something called a fire We've got something called a fire We've got something called a fire syringe. And what does it do? syringe. And what does it do? syringe. And what does it do? Oh, well, I'll show you what it does. Oh, well, I'll show you what it does. Oh, well, I'll show you what it does. Some cotton wool in there. Some cotton wool in there. Some cotton wool in there. Okay, Okay, Okay, I'm just going to compress the air in I'm just going to compress the air in I'm just going to compress the air in it, and hopefully it will I don't know it, and hopefully it will I don't know it, and hopefully it will I don't know what it's going to do. Wow, Wow, Wow, that's pretty cool. that's pretty cool. that's pretty cool. You made a spark in there. Was there any You made a spark in there. Was there any You made a spark in there. Was there any source of fire, like a match or anything source of fire, like a match or anything source of fire, like a match or anything down there? down there? down there? Well, as you can see, it's pretty Well, as you can see, it's pretty Well, as you can see, it's pretty transparent. There was no match in transparent. There was no match in transparent. There was no match in there. Um it was actually just the there. Um it was actually just the there. Um it was actually just the compression of the air on top of it um compression of the air on top of it um compression of the air on top of it um which was able to ignite the um the which was able to ignite the um the which was able to ignite the um the cotton wall that we had in there. cotton wall that we had in there. cotton wall that we had in there. So you're saying if we compress air we So you're saying if we compress air we So you're saying if we compress air we can make it hot enough to ignite cotton. can make it hot enough to ignite cotton. can make it hot enough to ignite cotton. Yeah. By because air is made up of Yeah. By because air is made up of Yeah. By because air is made up of particles. So when you're actually particles. So when you're actually particles. So when you're actually compressing it you're forcing those compressing it you're forcing those compressing it you're forcing those particles to collide closer together particles to collide closer together particles to collide closer together which is actually going to raise the which is actually going to raise the which is actually going to raise the temperature of in the inside of that temperature of in the inside of that temperature of in the inside of that tube there. Okay. Can you describe the tube there. Okay. Can you describe the tube there. Okay. Can you describe the apparatus for me? Well, all there is is apparatus for me? Well, all there is is apparatus for me? Well, all there is is there's a glass chamber in there where there's a glass chamber in there where there's a glass chamber in there where the cotton wall sits. And as you can the cotton wall sits. And as you can the cotton wall sits. And as you can see, there's this piston that moves up see, there's this piston that moves up see, there's this piston that moves up and down into that glass chamber. And as and down into that glass chamber. And as and down into that glass chamber. And as it moves up and down, you can actually it moves up and down, you can actually it moves up and down, you can actually compress the air. compress the air. compress the air. So, it's like a little plunger. So, it's like a little plunger. So, it's like a little plunger. Like like a little plunger. Yeah. Like like a little plunger. Yeah. Like like a little plunger. Yeah. Okay. So, uh why don't we set one up uh Okay. So, uh why don't we set one up uh Okay. So, uh why don't we set one up uh so we can do it again? so we can do it again? so we can do it again? Do it again. Okay. I'll clean the Do it again. Okay. I'll clean the Do it again. Okay. I'll clean the remnants out. What are the tricks here? remnants out. What are the tricks here? remnants out. What are the tricks here? Uh the trick is to get not too much but Uh the trick is to get not too much but Uh the trick is to get not too much but not too little cotton wool. And it's not too little cotton wool. And it's not too little cotton wool. And it's good to get it airrated so that there's good to get it airrated so that there's good to get it airrated so that there's a lot of air around it so it makes it a lot of air around it so it makes it a lot of air around it so it makes it much easy to um ignite just like a good much easy to um ignite just like a good much easy to um ignite just like a good fire. fire. fire. Is it just me or do you feel like we're Is it just me or do you feel like we're Is it just me or do you feel like we're on a cooking show? on a cooking show? on a cooking show? I feel like we're on a cooking show. I feel like we're on a cooking show. I feel like we're on a cooking show. Yes. Yes. Yes. Who do you think would be Jamie Oliver Who do you think would be Jamie Oliver Who do you think would be Jamie Oliver in this situation? Would it be you or in this situation? Would it be you or in this situation? Would it be you or me? me? me? I'm more manly. So I'm more manly. So I'm more manly. So he's more like Nigella Lawson, let's he's more like Nigella Lawson, let's he's more like Nigella Lawson, let's face it. face it. face it. That's a good play on words. That's a good play on words. That's a good play on words. I wish. I wish. I wish. All right, we're ready for this. All right, we're ready for this. All right, we're ready for this. Yes. Simple as that. Obviously, no Yes. Simple as that. Obviously, no Yes. Simple as that. Obviously, no matches, no switches, no anything. Okay. matches, no switches, no anything. Okay. matches, no switches, no anything. Okay. Um, we'll try it Um, we'll try it Um, we'll try it again. again. again. You want me to try? You want me to try? You want me to try? You can try it. Do you have the You can try it. Do you have the You can try it. Do you have the strength? strength? strength? We're going to find out. We're going to find out. We're going to find out. We'll find out. This is going to be We'll find out. This is going to be We'll find out. This is going to be awkward, Derek, I think. awkward, Derek, I think. awkward, Derek, I think. Okay. So, what I'm going to try to do is Okay. So, what I'm going to try to do is Okay. So, what I'm going to try to do is compress the air in there. And uh, by compress the air in there. And uh, by compress the air in there. And uh, by compressing it, I'm going to increase compressing it, I'm going to increase compressing it, I'm going to increase its temperature cuz we're pushing all its temperature cuz we're pushing all its temperature cuz we're pushing all these air molecules together. And if I these air molecules together. And if I these air molecules together. And if I get it hot enough to the ignition point get it hot enough to the ignition point get it hot enough to the ignition point of cotton, hopefully cotton will catch of cotton, hopefully cotton will catch of cotton, hopefully cotton will catch on fire. on fire. on fire. Yeah. I've heard that the um auto Yeah. I've heard that the um auto Yeah. I've heard that the um auto ignition temperature of of cotton is ignition temperature of of cotton is ignition temperature of of cotton is about 400° C. So you can get quite quite about 400° C. So you can get quite quite about 400° C. So you can get quite quite enormous amounts of temperature from a enormous amounts of temperature from a enormous amounts of temperature from a very quick compression. 3 2 1. Oh, Oh, Oh, surprise. surprise. surprise. Beginner's luck. Beginner's luck. Beginner's luck. Yeah, check that out. So I guess we Yeah, check that out. So I guess we Yeah, check that out. So I guess we could generalize and say if you do the could generalize and say if you do the could generalize and say if you do the compression quite slowly then well compression quite slowly then well compression quite slowly then well there's time for the heat to escape out there's time for the heat to escape out there's time for the heat to escape out of the air and so we don't actually get of the air and so we don't actually get of the air and so we don't actually get a high high enough temperature to cause a high high enough temperature to cause a high high enough temperature to cause the cotton to ignite. Yeah. And there's actually a word for Yeah. And there's actually a word for Yeah. And there's actually a word for that. It's called an adiabatic that. It's called an adiabatic that. It's called an adiabatic compression. That's the one where compression. That's the one where compression. That's the one where there's enough heat generated quickly there's enough heat generated quickly there's enough heat generated quickly enough so that we can get that auto enough so that we can get that auto enough so that we can get that auto ignition. ignition. ignition. Yeah. So, an adiabatic compression would Yeah. So, an adiabatic compression would Yeah. So, an adiabatic compression would be one in which the heat doesn't escape be one in which the heat doesn't escape be one in which the heat doesn't escape from the gas. from the gas. from the gas. Doesn't have the time to. Doesn't have the time to. Doesn't have the time to. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well, let's go see if we can All right. Well, let's go see if we can All right. Well, let's go see if we can auto ignite some other things. auto ignite some other things. auto ignite some other things. Yeah. Maybe some hair. Okay. Yeah. Maybe some hair. Okay. Yeah. Maybe some hair. Okay. Maybe not a good fuel source.