Title: Galileo the Scientific Parrot
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UxbeLdXnaGU

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Okay, so we're at the University of Okay, so we're at the University of Okay, so we're at the University of Sydney to experiment with Dr. Phil's Sydney to experiment with Dr. Phil's Sydney to experiment with Dr. Phil's dead bird. dead bird. dead bird. He's a famous scientist, this guy. He He's a famous scientist, this guy. He He's a famous scientist, this guy. He helped us out back in uh the 16th helped us out back in uh the 16th helped us out back in uh the 16th century. century. century. It was a 17th century, isn't it? It was a 17th century, isn't it? It was a 17th century, isn't it? 17th century. 1600 1600s. Thank you. 17th century. 1600 1600s. Thank you. 17th century. 1600 1600s. Thank you. Galileo Galileo Galileo was uh was discussing gravity. Um a lot was uh was discussing gravity. Um a lot was uh was discussing gravity. Um a lot of people, of course, thought that of people, of course, thought that of people, of course, thought that different things fell at different different things fell at different different things fell at different rates, but Galileo said, "No, no, no, rates, but Galileo said, "No, no, no, rates, but Galileo said, "No, no, no, no, no. Gravity is the same for all no, no. Gravity is the same for all no, no. Gravity is the same for all bodies, no matter how heavy or light. bodies, no matter how heavy or light. bodies, no matter how heavy or light. Um, so we're going to prove that right Um, so we're going to prove that right Um, so we're going to prove that right now, aren't we? now, aren't we? now, aren't we? Okay, let's give it a shot. Okay, let's give it a shot. Okay, let's give it a shot. Yeah. So, so, um, young, uh, Galileo Yeah. So, so, um, young, uh, Galileo Yeah. So, so, um, young, uh, Galileo here, he's going to lend us a feather. here, he's going to lend us a feather. here, he's going to lend us a feather. Feather's very light, but it's still Feather's very light, but it's still Feather's very light, but it's still going to fall at the same acceleration going to fall at the same acceleration going to fall at the same acceleration as this coin made of metal. as this coin made of metal. as this coin made of metal. So, you're telling me they're going to So, you're telling me they're going to So, you're telling me they're going to accelerate together towards the ground? accelerate together towards the ground? accelerate together towards the ground? That's right. That's right. That's right. And you know, I don't believe you. I've And you know, I don't believe you. I've And you know, I don't believe you. I've How could you? I'm a scientist. All How could you? I'm a scientist. All How could you? I'm a scientist. All right. right. right. So, let's do the experiment and let's So, let's do the experiment and let's So, let's do the experiment and let's see what happens. see what happens. see what happens. Yeah. One, two, three. That's actually going upwards. That's actually going upwards. That's actually going upwards. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] All right. So, what was happening there? All right. So, what was happening there? All right. So, what was happening there? Obviously, they didn't accelerate down Obviously, they didn't accelerate down Obviously, they didn't accelerate down at the same rate. at the same rate. at the same rate. Well, maybe there's some other factors Well, maybe there's some other factors Well, maybe there's some other factors going on here. What do you reckon? going on here. What do you reckon? going on here. What do you reckon? Maybe. Or maybe it's uh it's the dead Maybe. Or maybe it's uh it's the dead Maybe. Or maybe it's uh it's the dead bird's fault. bird's fault. bird's fault. Maybe it's the dead bird's fault. He was Maybe it's the dead bird's fault. He was Maybe it's the dead bird's fault. He was blowing up. Blowing. It's air. Maybe we blowing up. Blowing. It's air. Maybe we blowing up. Blowing. It's air. Maybe we need to get rid of the air. What do you need to get rid of the air. What do you need to get rid of the air. What do you reckon? reckon? reckon? Okay, let's get rid of the air and see Okay, let's get rid of the air and see Okay, let's get rid of the air and see what happens. what happens. what happens. As it happens, we've got a vacuum pump As it happens, we've got a vacuum pump As it happens, we've got a vacuum pump here. here. here. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, if we put this feather So, if we put this feather So, if we put this feather and this coin coin coin in here, in here, in here, seal it up. Then we can pump all the air out. Then we can pump all the air out. Then we can pump all the air out. All right, let's do it. So, we're All right, let's do it. So, we're All right, let's do it. So, we're sucking all the air out now. It's coming sucking all the air out now. It's coming sucking all the air out now. It's coming out of the pipe, down the tube, out of out of the pipe, down the tube, out of out of the pipe, down the tube, out of here, through the air. So, uh, we're here, through the air. So, uh, we're here, through the air. So, uh, we're really getting rid of most of the air, really getting rid of most of the air, really getting rid of most of the air, so there'll be no wind resistance as the so there'll be no wind resistance as the so there'll be no wind resistance as the feather falls this time. It's kind of feather falls this time. It's kind of feather falls this time. It's kind of like a vacuum cleaner, but it really like a vacuum cleaner, but it really like a vacuum cleaner, but it really sucks. sucks. sucks. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] All right. So, uh, let's try it out. All right. So, uh, let's try it out. All right. So, uh, let's try it out. Let's see if, uh, they accelerate with Let's see if, uh, they accelerate with Let's see if, uh, they accelerate with the same rate. Now, the same rate. Now, the same rate. Now, you ready for this? you ready for this? you ready for this? Yep. Yep. Yep. One, two, three. Wow, they did fall at the same rate. Wow, they did fall at the same rate. Wow, they did fall at the same rate. [laughter]