Title: How Damaging is Radiation
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wQmnztyXwVA

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en What is radiation? What is radiation? What is radiation? Isn't it a bad type of poisoning? Isn't it a bad type of poisoning? Isn't it a bad type of poisoning? It's just like a dirty word to me. It's It's just like a dirty word to me. It's It's just like a dirty word to me. It's just something which is not good. Not just something which is not good. Not just something which is not good. Not good for me being a human being exposed good for me being a human being exposed good for me being a human being exposed to great amounts of it. to great amounts of it. to great amounts of it. Waves of Waves of Waves of bad stuff. [laughter] bad stuff. [laughter] bad stuff. [laughter] Yeah. I mean, it's dangerous. We all Yeah. I mean, it's dangerous. We all Yeah. I mean, it's dangerous. We all know that, right? know that, right? know that, right? Water's good for you. Radiation's not Water's good for you. Radiation's not Water's good for you. Radiation's not easy. easy. easy. It can go right through like walls. It can go right through like walls. It can go right through like walls. radiation can seep through the concrete radiation can seep through the concrete radiation can seep through the concrete walls and walls and walls and so it goes it's absorbed into your skin so it goes it's absorbed into your skin so it goes it's absorbed into your skin and then you get poisoning from it. and then you get poisoning from it. and then you get poisoning from it. The radiation itself could damage the The radiation itself could damage the The radiation itself could damage the DNA DNA DNA changing like I guess mutations changing like I guess mutations changing like I guess mutations mutations. mutations. mutations. It ruins tissues and whatnot and that It ruins tissues and whatnot and that It ruins tissues and whatnot and that can break down the body and it's not can break down the body and it's not can break down the body and it's not healthy. It causes like cancer and healthy. It causes like cancer and healthy. It causes like cancer and things like that. things like that. things like that. Are you exposed to radiation? Are you exposed to radiation? Are you exposed to radiation? No. Not at all. No. No. Not at all. No. No. Not at all. No. Um, Um, Um, no. no. no. Probably in some ways, Probably in some ways, Probably in some ways, but you don't know exactly how. but you don't know exactly how. but you don't know exactly how. No, not really. No, not really. No, not really. From the sun. From the sun. From the sun. Um, Um, Um, mobile phones, they tell us. mobile phones, they tell us. mobile phones, they tell us. Yeah. Yeah. Probably from a lot of Yeah. Yeah. Probably from a lot of Yeah. Yeah. Probably from a lot of electronic sources. electronic sources. electronic sources. Microwaves and things. Microwaves and things. Microwaves and things. Microwaves. Mobile phones. Microwaves. Mobile phones. Microwaves. Mobile phones. Yeah. Cell phones. Yeah. Cell phones. Yeah. Cell phones. Are they cancer causing, do you think? Are they cancer causing, do you think? Are they cancer causing, do you think? I think they are because um Yeah. I mean I think they are because um Yeah. I mean I think they are because um Yeah. I mean like a lot of people have come up with like a lot of people have come up with like a lot of people have come up with like you know cancer tumors around the like you know cancer tumors around the like you know cancer tumors around the ear area recently and um I think that's ear area recently and um I think that's ear area recently and um I think that's too much of a coincidence to not be too much of a coincidence to not be too much of a coincidence to not be involved with the mobile phone usage. I involved with the mobile phone usage. I involved with the mobile phone usage. I think that it does but I it doesn't think that it does but I it doesn't think that it does but I it doesn't affect my daytoday life and you know affect my daytoday life and you know affect my daytoday life and you know where I put my phone and still carry it where I put my phone and still carry it where I put my phone and still carry it in my pocket even though I might get in my pocket even though I might get in my pocket even though I might get cancer in my leg. I mean it's not cancer in my leg. I mean it's not cancer in my leg. I mean it's not changing my life. UV rays gamma changing my life. UV rays gamma changing my life. UV rays gamma x-rays x-rays x-rays gamma alpha beta gamma alpha beta gamma alpha beta alpha beta gamma. Yeah. [laughter] All alpha beta gamma. Yeah. [laughter] All alpha beta gamma. Yeah. [laughter] All right, let's take a closer look at these right, let's take a closer look at these right, let's take a closer look at these examples. They are all in fact types of examples. They are all in fact types of examples. They are all in fact types of radiation, assuming by mobile phones we radiation, assuming by mobile phones we radiation, assuming by mobile phones we mean the waves that they transmit, which mean the waves that they transmit, which mean the waves that they transmit, which are microwaves. But there are some are microwaves. But there are some are microwaves. But there are some important distinctions between these uh important distinctions between these uh important distinctions between these uh different types of radiation. For different types of radiation. For different types of radiation. For example, alpha and beta rays are example, alpha and beta rays are example, alpha and beta rays are actually tiny particles moving very actually tiny particles moving very actually tiny particles moving very fast, whereas the rest of these types of fast, whereas the rest of these types of fast, whereas the rest of these types of radiation are all waves very similar to radiation are all waves very similar to radiation are all waves very similar to light. So let's arrange them by light. So let's arrange them by light. So let's arrange them by particles on the right and waves on the particles on the right and waves on the particles on the right and waves on the left. left. left. Another very important distinction is Another very important distinction is Another very important distinction is between the radiation that can do damage between the radiation that can do damage between the radiation that can do damage to molecules like DNA and radiation that to molecules like DNA and radiation that to molecules like DNA and radiation that can't. So let's rearrange the radiation can't. So let's rearrange the radiation can't. So let's rearrange the radiation into these groups. into these groups. into these groups. So the damaging radiation includes UV So the damaging radiation includes UV So the damaging radiation includes UV rays, X-rays, gamma rays, and alpha and rays, X-rays, gamma rays, and alpha and rays, X-rays, gamma rays, and alpha and beta particles. So sunlight and beta particles. So sunlight and beta particles. So sunlight and microwaves, including the waves used by microwaves, including the waves used by microwaves, including the waves used by mobile phones, should not be able to mobile phones, should not be able to mobile phones, should not be able to cause damage to molecules. So where is cause damage to molecules. So where is cause damage to molecules. So where is most of your exposure to damaging most of your exposure to damaging most of your exposure to damaging radiation coming from? Well, for one radiation coming from? Well, for one radiation coming from? Well, for one thing, there are [clears throat] thing, there are [clears throat] thing, there are [clears throat] radioactive isotopes in the soil and in radioactive isotopes in the soil and in radioactive isotopes in the soil and in the air that we breathe. So we get a the air that we breathe. So we get a the air that we breathe. So we get a very low level of background radiation very low level of background radiation very low level of background radiation from these sources. Also, every time we from these sources. Also, every time we from these sources. Also, every time we take a plane trip, we're exposed to take a plane trip, we're exposed to take a plane trip, we're exposed to higher levels of what's called cosmic higher levels of what's called cosmic higher levels of what's called cosmic radiation, which are particles that are radiation, which are particles that are radiation, which are particles that are streaming towards us from outer space. streaming towards us from outer space. streaming towards us from outer space. Normally, these are blocked out by the Normally, these are blocked out by the Normally, these are blocked out by the atmosphere, but at the high altitudes atmosphere, but at the high altitudes atmosphere, but at the high altitudes that planes fly at, uh, we're exposed to that planes fly at, uh, we're exposed to that planes fly at, uh, we're exposed to more of this radiation. Every time you more of this radiation. Every time you more of this radiation. Every time you get an X-ray at the dentist or to check get an X-ray at the dentist or to check get an X-ray at the dentist or to check for broken bones, that also gives you a for broken bones, that also gives you a for broken bones, that also gives you a significant dose of radiation. But significant dose of radiation. But significant dose of radiation. But generally, the levels of radiation that generally, the levels of radiation that generally, the levels of radiation that we're exposed to are so low that it's we're exposed to are so low that it's we're exposed to are so low that it's not worth worrying about. Bananas are not worth worrying about. Bananas are not worth worrying about. Bananas are radioactive. radioactive. radioactive. Why is that? Why is that? Why is that? They have potassium 40. They have potassium 40. They have potassium 40. 40. 40. 40. And so if you eat too many bananas, you And so if you eat too many bananas, you And so if you eat too many bananas, you can get readings of a geer counter. can get readings of a geer counter. can get readings of a geer counter. Do you eat bananas? Do you eat bananas? Do you eat bananas? I don't either. I don't either. I don't either. I love bananas. I love bananas. I love bananas. I love [laughter] them. I love [laughter] them. I love [laughter] them. And I'm still fine. I guess And I'm still fine. I guess And I'm still fine. I guess it never puts you off the thought that it never puts you off the thought that it never puts you off the thought that it could it could it could could be radiating you. could be radiating you. could be radiating you. It's kind of cool to be honest. like It's kind of cool to be honest. like It's kind of cool to be honest. like radioactive powers or