Title: How Does A Boomerang Work
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADJKsLEAOHo

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en How does a boomerang work? Well, it How does a boomerang work? Well, it How does a boomerang work? Well, it relies on three fundamental principles. relies on three fundamental principles. relies on three fundamental principles. Lift, relative velocity, and gyroscopic Lift, relative velocity, and gyroscopic Lift, relative velocity, and gyroscopic procession. Now, a traditional procession. Now, a traditional procession. Now, a traditional Australian boomerang is basically just Australian boomerang is basically just Australian boomerang is basically just two wings stuck together. And both two wings stuck together. And both two wings stuck together. And both generate lift that keeps the boomerang generate lift that keeps the boomerang generate lift that keeps the boomerang in the air. But the thing is, as the in the air. But the thing is, as the in the air. But the thing is, as the boomerang is rotating, the top actually boomerang is rotating, the top actually boomerang is rotating, the top actually rotates with the direction the boomerang rotates with the direction the boomerang rotates with the direction the boomerang is moving, while the bottom is rotating is moving, while the bottom is rotating is moving, while the bottom is rotating in the opposite direction. So air flows in the opposite direction. So air flows in the opposite direction. So air flows faster over the top of the boomerang, faster over the top of the boomerang, faster over the top of the boomerang, creating more lift than over the bottom. creating more lift than over the bottom. creating more lift than over the bottom. So those unequal forces generate a So those unequal forces generate a So those unequal forces generate a torque, and you might expect that torque torque, and you might expect that torque torque, and you might expect that torque to flip the boomerang over, but it to flip the boomerang over, but it to flip the boomerang over, but it doesn't. And that's because the doesn't. And that's because the doesn't. And that's because the boomerang is thrown with a very fast boomerang is thrown with a very fast boomerang is thrown with a very fast spin. So that spin means that the spin. So that spin means that the spin. So that spin means that the boomerang has angular momentum, a boomerang has angular momentum, a boomerang has angular momentum, a significant amount of it. And if you significant amount of it. And if you significant amount of it. And if you want to figure out which direction that want to figure out which direction that want to figure out which direction that is, you put your fingers of your right is, you put your fingers of your right is, you put your fingers of your right hand in the direction of rotation and hand in the direction of rotation and hand in the direction of rotation and your thumb points in the direction of your thumb points in the direction of your thumb points in the direction of the angular momentum. So as it's the angular momentum. So as it's the angular momentum. So as it's spinning, that torque actually changes spinning, that torque actually changes spinning, that torque actually changes the angular momentum. It changes the the angular momentum. It changes the the angular momentum. It changes the angular momentum in the direction of the angular momentum in the direction of the angular momentum in the direction of the torque. And the torque in this case is torque. And the torque in this case is torque. And the torque in this case is back towards me. So the angular momentum back towards me. So the angular momentum back towards me. So the angular momentum is changed to point around at me which is changed to point around at me which is changed to point around at me which allows this boomerang to execute its allows this boomerang to execute its allows this boomerang to execute its curved path and come back to where it curved path and come back to where it curved path and come back to where it started. Now that phenomenon is known as started. Now that phenomenon is known as started. Now that phenomenon is known as gyroscopic procession. Now if you want gyroscopic procession. Now if you want gyroscopic procession. Now if you want to see an awesome boomerang shot, you to see an awesome boomerang shot, you to see an awesome boomerang shot, you got to check out how ridiculous they got to check out how ridiculous they got to check out how ridiculous they tried to split an egg with a boomerang. tried to split an egg with a boomerang. tried to split an egg with a boomerang. And they've done lots of other cool And they've done lots of other cool And they've done lots of other cool tricks like catching a frisbee from a tricks like catching a frisbee from a tricks like catching a frisbee from a speedboat. So you got to check it out speedboat. So you got to check it out speedboat. So you got to check it out and subscribe to their channel and then and subscribe to their channel and then and subscribe to their channel and then [music] come back to me and I will [music] come back to me and I will [music] come back to me and I will explain the physics of all of it to you. explain the physics of all of it to you. explain the physics of all of it to you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. [music] [music] [music] Heat. [music] [music] [music] [music] [music] shooting stars on your wedding day. Other fun facts about boomerangs. Other fun facts about boomerangs. Other fun facts about boomerangs. Although we usually associate them with Although we usually associate them with Although we usually associate them with Australia, they've also been found in Australia, they've also been found in Australia, they've also been found in places like ancient Egypt and Europe. places like ancient Egypt and Europe. places like ancient Egypt and Europe. And some of them apparently are And some of them apparently are And some of them apparently are non-returning boomerangs. And that makes non-returning boomerangs. And that makes non-returning boomerangs. And that makes me ask, well, what really makes it a me ask, well, what really makes it a me ask, well, what really makes it a boomerang if it doesn't come back to boomerang if it doesn't come back to boomerang if it doesn't come back to you? Some people call those throwing you? Some people call those throwing you? Some people call those throwing sticks, which I think sounds like a more sticks, which I think sounds like a more sticks, which I think sounds like a more apt name for something that doesn't come apt name for something that doesn't come apt name for something that doesn't come back to you. And you know, we've even back to you. And you know, we've even back to you. And you know, we've even tried boomerangs in space. So, a tried boomerangs in space. So, a tried boomerangs in space. So, a boomerang will still fly. It'll still go boomerang will still fly. It'll still go boomerang will still fly. It'll still go around even in zero g. That's pretty around even in zero g. That's pretty around even in zero g. That's pretty incredible. That's physics.