Title: How Much Information
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zUDqI9PJpc8

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] Have you ever noticed that people Have you ever noticed that people Have you ever noticed that people speaking Spanish sound like they're speaking Spanish sound like they're speaking Spanish sound like they're talking really fast? Does this mean they're able to Does this mean they're able to Does this mean they're able to communicate information faster than communicate information faster than communicate information faster than English speakers? English speakers? English speakers? One reason why Spanish sounds so fast is One reason why Spanish sounds so fast is One reason why Spanish sounds so fast is because more syllables are spoken per because more syllables are spoken per because more syllables are spoken per minute than in English. However, minute than in English. However, minute than in English. However, analysis has shown that each Spanish analysis has shown that each Spanish analysis has shown that each Spanish syllable conveys less information than syllable conveys less information than syllable conveys less information than each English syllable. So, the each English syllable. So, the each English syllable. So, the information per minute is almost information per minute is almost information per minute is almost identical. But what about written identical. But what about written identical. But what about written language? The square format of Chinese language? The square format of Chinese language? The square format of Chinese characters appears to fit better into characters appears to fit better into characters appears to fit better into our central visual field than the our central visual field than the our central visual field than the longer, slimmer words of English. This longer, slimmer words of English. This longer, slimmer words of English. This led linguists to suspect that Chinese led linguists to suspect that Chinese led linguists to suspect that Chinese would be read faster than English. But would be read faster than English. But would be read faster than English. But experiments show that English readers experiments show that English readers experiments show that English readers can perceive 7 to eight letters at once can perceive 7 to eight letters at once can perceive 7 to eight letters at once compared to just 2.6 characters for compared to just 2.6 characters for compared to just 2.6 characters for Chinese. However, those Chinese Chinese. However, those Chinese Chinese. However, those Chinese characters are denser in meaning than characters are denser in meaning than characters are denser in meaning than the English letters. And so both the English letters. And so both the English letters. And so both languages have basically an identical languages have basically an identical languages have basically an identical reading rate of 380 words equivalent per reading rate of 380 words equivalent per reading rate of 380 words equivalent per minute. This suggests that what limits minute. This suggests that what limits minute. This suggests that what limits the speed of our communication is not the speed of our communication is not the speed of our communication is not language but our cognitive ability to language but our cognitive ability to language but our cognitive ability to process information. But how can you process information. But how can you process information. But how can you really quantify information? Well, the really quantify information? Well, the really quantify information? Well, the smallest amount of information you can smallest amount of information you can smallest amount of information you can have is the answer to a yes no question. have is the answer to a yes no question. have is the answer to a yes no question. Like have you seen the movie Frozen? Like have you seen the movie Frozen? Like have you seen the movie Frozen? Yes. Yes or no? Heads or tails? We can Yes. Yes or no? Heads or tails? We can Yes. Yes or no? Heads or tails? We can represent this single outcome with a one represent this single outcome with a one represent this single outcome with a one or a zero. One binary digit, it's one or a zero. One binary digit, it's one or a zero. One binary digit, it's one bit of information. bit of information. bit of information. A roll of the dice has six possible A roll of the dice has six possible A roll of the dice has six possible outcomes. So, three bits of information outcomes. So, three bits of information outcomes. So, three bits of information are required to cover all the options. are required to cover all the options. are required to cover all the options. To uniquely represent all 26 letters of To uniquely represent all 26 letters of To uniquely represent all 26 letters of the English alphabet requires five bits the English alphabet requires five bits the English alphabet requires five bits of information. But if you include of information. But if you include of information. But if you include lowercase, punctuation, special lowercase, punctuation, special lowercase, punctuation, special characters, and numbers, that takes the characters, and numbers, that takes the characters, and numbers, that takes the total number of symbols to 95. So you total number of symbols to 95. So you total number of symbols to 95. So you actually need seven bits of information actually need seven bits of information actually need seven bits of information to encode all these symbols. That was to encode all these symbols. That was to encode all these symbols. That was first done in 1963 as the American first done in 1963 as the American first done in 1963 as the American standard code for information standard code for information standard code for information interchange or ASKI for short. Now as interchange or ASKI for short. Now as interchange or ASKI for short. Now as the next closest power of two, computers the next closest power of two, computers the next closest power of two, computers adopted 8 bits as the fundamental unit adopted 8 bits as the fundamental unit adopted 8 bits as the fundamental unit of computation and they called it the of computation and they called it the of computation and they called it the bite where they intentionally replaced bite where they intentionally replaced bite where they intentionally replaced the I with a Y so that it couldn't the I with a Y so that it couldn't the I with a Y so that it couldn't accidentally be confused with a bit. So accidentally be confused with a bit. So accidentally be confused with a bit. So how much information does it take to how much information does it take to how much information does it take to make you? Well, your entire genetic code make you? Well, your entire genetic code make you? Well, your entire genetic code is contained in the sequence of four is contained in the sequence of four is contained in the sequence of four molecules represented by the letters T, molecules represented by the letters T, molecules represented by the letters T, A, G, and C in your DNA. Each of these A, G, and C in your DNA. Each of these A, G, and C in your DNA. Each of these four options can be encoded by two bits four options can be encoded by two bits four options can be encoded by two bits of information. And multiplying by the 6 of information. And multiplying by the 6 of information. And multiplying by the 6 billion letters of genetic code in your billion letters of genetic code in your billion letters of genetic code in your genome, and dividing by 8 bits per bite, genome, and dividing by 8 bits per bite, genome, and dividing by 8 bits per bite, that yields 1.5 GB of information. So, that yields 1.5 GB of information. So, that yields 1.5 GB of information. So, you could fit your entire genetic code you could fit your entire genetic code you could fit your entire genetic code on a single DVD with room to spare. Now, on a single DVD with room to spare. Now, on a single DVD with room to spare. Now, your body has an estimated 40 trillion your body has an estimated 40 trillion your body has an estimated 40 trillion cells in it. and each one contains a cells in it. and each one contains a cells in it. and each one contains a full copy of your DNA. So you actually full copy of your DNA. So you actually full copy of your DNA. So you actually contain 60 zetabytes of information. contain 60 zetabytes of information. contain 60 zetabytes of information. That's 60 followed by 21 zeros. Just to That's 60 followed by 21 zeros. Just to That's 60 followed by 21 zeros. Just to put this in perspective, by the year put this in perspective, by the year put this in perspective, by the year 2020, all of the digital information in 2020, all of the digital information in 2020, all of the digital information in the world is estimated to be equal to 40 the world is estimated to be equal to 40 the world is estimated to be equal to 40 zetabytes of information. You could zetabytes of information. You could zetabytes of information. You could store all of that on 100 g of DNA. That store all of that on 100 g of DNA. That store all of that on 100 g of DNA. That is less than you have inside your body. is less than you have inside your body. is less than you have inside your body. But now consider this. You share 99.9% But now consider this. You share 99.9% But now consider this. You share 99.9% of your genetic information with of your genetic information with of your genetic information with everyone else on Earth. Meaning that everyone else on Earth. Meaning that everyone else on Earth. Meaning that less than one part in a thousand is less than one part in a thousand is less than one part in a thousand is unique. So the information that makes unique. So the information that makes unique. So the information that makes you you could be stored in less than a you you could be stored in less than a you you could be stored in less than a megabyte. You could put it on one of megabyte. You could put it on one of megabyte. You could put it on one of these, a floppy disc. In case you don't these, a floppy disc. In case you don't these, a floppy disc. In case you don't know what that is. In contrast, video know what that is. In contrast, video know what that is. In contrast, video can contain a lot of information. To can contain a lot of information. To can contain a lot of information. To specify the color of each of 2 million specify the color of each of 2 million specify the color of each of 2 million pixels 30 times a second for this entire pixels 30 times a second for this entire pixels 30 times a second for this entire video would require a 100 gigabytes of video would require a 100 gigabytes of video would require a 100 gigabytes of information. But you can watch this information. But you can watch this information. But you can watch this video in HD on YouTube with just a video in HD on YouTube with just a video in HD on YouTube with just a thousandth that amount. Now the reason thousandth that amount. Now the reason thousandth that amount. Now the reason you can send such a big video with such you can send such a big video with such you can send such a big video with such a small file size is because video like a small file size is because video like a small file size is because video like Spanish has a lot of parts that are Spanish has a lot of parts that are Spanish has a lot of parts that are redundant. redundant. redundant. Hey Michael, you know what I've been Hey Michael, you know what I've been Hey Michael, you know what I've been thinking about? thinking about? thinking about? What are you thinking about Derek? What are you thinking about Derek? What are you thinking about Derek? Information. Go on. It's a physical Information. Go on. It's a physical Information. Go on. It's a physical thing. It's embodied in actual objects. thing. It's embodied in actual objects. thing. It's embodied in actual objects. How's that? How's that? How's that? Well, you know, like the words we say, Well, you know, like the words we say, Well, you know, like the words we say, they're actual vibrations in the air, they're actual vibrations in the air, they're actual vibrations in the air, right? They're not just concepts. They right? They're not just concepts. They right? They're not just concepts. They are real physical things that you could are real physical things that you could are real physical things that you could measure and detect. measure and detect. measure and detect. That's true. And they don't go away. That's true. And they don't go away. That's true. And they don't go away. They don't disappear even after they've, They don't disappear even after they've, They don't disappear even after they've, for instance, moved through the air. for instance, moved through the air. for instance, moved through the air. Right. After we've said these words, Right. After we've said these words, Right. After we've said these words, they have actually interacted with they have actually interacted with they have actually interacted with everything around us. So, you're saying everything around us. So, you're saying everything around us. So, you're saying that technically I could look at the that technically I could look at the that technically I could look at the world and if I knew enough about it and world and if I knew enough about it and world and if I knew enough about it and the position of its particles, I could the position of its particles, I could the position of its particles, I could trace back and extrapolate all the trace back and extrapolate all the trace back and extrapolate all the information that's ever occurred through information that's ever occurred through information that's ever occurred through them or at them. them or at them. them or at them. That's right. You could in principle That's right. You could in principle That's right. You could in principle figure out exactly what we've said here figure out exactly what we've said here figure out exactly what we've said here today. today. today. Whoa. This episode of Veritasium was inspired This episode of Veritasium was inspired This episode of Veritasium was inspired by the book The Information by James by the book The Information by James by the book The Information by James Gleak. And you can actually download Gleak. And you can actually download Gleak. And you can actually download this book for free by going to this book for free by going to this book for free by going to audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. audible.com/veritassium. Or you can pick any other book of your Or you can pick any other book of your Or you can pick any other book of your choosing for a one month free trial. choosing for a one month free trial. choosing for a one month free trial. Audible is a leading provider of Audible is a leading provider of Audible is a leading provider of audiobooks with over 150,000 titles in audiobooks with over 150,000 titles in audiobooks with over 150,000 titles in all areas of literature, including all areas of literature, including all areas of literature, including fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. fiction, non-fiction, and periodicals. Now, if you've already read the Now, if you've already read the Now, if you've already read the information, you may want to check out information, you may want to check out information, you may want to check out Surely You're Joking, Mr. Fineman by Surely You're Joking, Mr. Fineman by Surely You're Joking, Mr. Fineman by Richard Feman. It's my favorite book by Richard Feman. It's my favorite book by Richard Feman. It's my favorite book by a scientist. It is absolutely hilarious. a scientist. It is absolutely hilarious. a scientist. It is absolutely hilarious. You will thank me for downloading it. You will thank me for downloading it. You will thank me for downloading it. So, go check it out. I really want to So, go check it out. I really want to So, go check it out. I really want to thank Audible for supporting me and I thank Audible for supporting me and I thank Audible for supporting me and I want to thank you for watching.