Title: Ice Cutting Experiment
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qQCVnjGUv24

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en All right, we're ready to do this All right, we're ready to do this All right, we're ready to do this experiment. I have the two 1.5 kg masses experiment. I have the two 1.5 kg masses experiment. I have the two 1.5 kg masses separated by a copper wire, and my separated by a copper wire, and my separated by a copper wire, and my housemate and assistant Colette has the housemate and assistant Colette has the housemate and assistant Colette has the two 1.5 kg weights separated by some two 1.5 kg weights separated by some two 1.5 kg weights separated by some fishing line. They're both the same fishing line. They're both the same fishing line. They're both the same thickness, so we're going to put them on thickness, so we're going to put them on thickness, so we're going to put them on simultaneously and see how they go in simultaneously and see how they go in simultaneously and see how they go in cutting through the ice. cutting through the ice. cutting through the ice. How's yours? [music] [music] [music] All right, we're roughly halfway through All right, we're roughly halfway through All right, we're roughly halfway through the experiment, but I ran into trouble. the experiment, but I ran into trouble. the experiment, but I ran into trouble. the uh copper wire actually pulled out the uh copper wire actually pulled out the uh copper wire actually pulled out of these weights and so they fell to the of these weights and so they fell to the of these weights and so they fell to the ground. Um, at this point it looks like ground. Um, at this point it looks like ground. Um, at this point it looks like the copper was doing slightly better the copper was doing slightly better the copper was doing slightly better than the fishing wire. Um, but I've had than the fishing wire. Um, but I've had than the fishing wire. Um, but I've had to rig up a new copper and so uh I'm to rig up a new copper and so uh I'm to rig up a new copper and so uh I'm going to try it in a different spot and going to try it in a different spot and going to try it in a different spot and let this new copper compete. I also um let this new copper compete. I also um let this new copper compete. I also um scraped off the insulation. There was scraped off the insulation. There was scraped off the insulation. There was some enamel coating on the copper wire. some enamel coating on the copper wire. some enamel coating on the copper wire. So I've scraped that off. So it should So I've scraped that off. So it should So I've scraped that off. So it should just be straight copper wire now. So just be straight copper wire now. So just be straight copper wire now. So let's see how it performs. [music] [music] [music] All right, it's half past 1, but it All right, it's half past 1, but it All right, it's half past 1, but it looks like the experiment is over and we looks like the experiment is over and we looks like the experiment is over and we have a winner. a copper wire pulled have a winner. a copper wire pulled have a winner. a copper wire pulled clean through the block of ice while the clean through the block of ice while the clean through the block of ice while the fishing line is still stuck in there. fishing line is still stuck in there. fishing line is still stuck in there. So, why was that? Why is the copper So, why was that? Why is the copper So, why was that? Why is the copper better able to pass through this ice better able to pass through this ice better able to pass through this ice block than the fishing line? Well, I block than the fishing line? Well, I block than the fishing line? Well, I think the answer may have something to think the answer may have something to think the answer may have something to do with thermal conductivity. The copper do with thermal conductivity. The copper do with thermal conductivity. The copper is a better conductor of heat than the is a better conductor of heat than the is a better conductor of heat than the fishing line. That's important because fishing line. That's important because fishing line. That's important because as the wire passes through, the ice as the wire passes through, the ice as the wire passes through, the ice refereezes once the wire has passed and refereezes once the wire has passed and refereezes once the wire has passed and that releases heat. If that heat is that releases heat. If that heat is that releases heat. If that heat is transferred quickly, it passes to the transferred quickly, it passes to the transferred quickly, it passes to the ice below, melting it and allowing the ice below, melting it and allowing the ice below, melting it and allowing the wire to move further and faster. Now, wire to move further and faster. Now, wire to move further and faster. Now, regulation is not just some abstract, regulation is not just some abstract, regulation is not just some abstract, useless scientific concept. Every time useless scientific concept. Every time useless scientific concept. Every time you make a snowball, you compress those you make a snowball, you compress those you make a snowball, you compress those ice crystals of the snow. And when you ice crystals of the snow. And when you ice crystals of the snow. And when you compress it, compress it, compress it, it melts a bit, turning into water. it melts a bit, turning into water. it melts a bit, turning into water. But as you release the pressure, it But as you release the pressure, it But as you release the pressure, it refreezes. refreezes. refreezes. So, what we've made is a snowball. Think So, what we've made is a snowball. Think So, what we've made is a snowball. Think about that next time you're having a about that next time you're having a about that next time you're having a snow fight.