Title: Is There Gravity In Space
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d57C2drB_wc

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Have you ever looked up into the night Have you ever looked up into the night Have you ever looked up into the night sky and wondered what it would be like sky and wondered what it would be like sky and wondered what it would be like to be an astronaut floating around in to be an astronaut floating around in to be an astronaut floating around in the space station? Why are the astronauts floating? Why are the astronauts floating? Why are the astronauts floating? There's weightlessness in space. You can There's weightlessness in space. You can There's weightlessness in space. You can experience a kind of weightlessness. experience a kind of weightlessness. experience a kind of weightlessness. Why Why are they weightless, though? Is Why Why are they weightless, though? Is Why Why are they weightless, though? Is there a gravitational force on them? there a gravitational force on them? there a gravitational force on them? Yeah, but I guess it's probably really Yeah, but I guess it's probably really Yeah, but I guess it's probably really weak. weak. weak. Not on the astronauts, cuz they just Not on the astronauts, cuz they just Not on the astronauts, cuz they just float around. like they'd float away if float around. like they'd float away if float around. like they'd float away if it wasn't for the walls of the space it wasn't for the walls of the space it wasn't for the walls of the space station, right? station, right? station, right? Cuz they're outside of Earth's Cuz they're outside of Earth's Cuz they're outside of Earth's gravitational pole. Oh, I see what gravitational pole. Oh, I see what gravitational pole. Oh, I see what you've done here. I see what you've done you've done here. I see what you've done you've done here. I see what you've done here. That's clever. H here. That's clever. H here. That's clever. H cuz now I want to say that they're cuz now I want to say that they're cuz now I want to say that they're outside of Earth's gravitational pole, outside of Earth's gravitational pole, outside of Earth's gravitational pole, but I just said that the moon wasn't. but I just said that the moon wasn't. but I just said that the moon wasn't. You got me. Well played. You got me. Well played. You got me. Well played. Think about this. The space station is Think about this. The space station is Think about this. The space station is only about 400 km away. So if you're in only about 400 km away. So if you're in only about 400 km away. So if you're in Sydney, it's about well a little further Sydney, it's about well a little further Sydney, it's about well a little further than the drive to CRA. Do you really than the drive to CRA. Do you really than the drive to CRA. Do you really think that the Earth exerts a big think that the Earth exerts a big think that the Earth exerts a big gravitational pull on you, but nothing gravitational pull on you, but nothing gravitational pull on you, but nothing on the astronauts a short distance away? as much as the force on you. So why are as much as the force on you. So why are as much as the force on you. So why are they floating while you're stuck here? they floating while you're stuck here? they floating while you're stuck here? The answer is the astronauts aren't The answer is the astronauts aren't The answer is the astronauts aren't floating, they're falling. And not only that, but the space station And not only that, but the space station And not only that, but the space station that they're in is falling as well. So why doesn't the space station come So why doesn't the space station come So why doesn't the space station come crashing into the Earth? crashing into the Earth? crashing into the Earth? Well, the reason is the space station Well, the reason is the space station Well, the reason is the space station and the astronauts have a huge sideways and the astronauts have a huge sideways and the astronauts have a huge sideways velocity of nearly 28,000 km hour. So velocity of nearly 28,000 km hour. So velocity of nearly 28,000 km hour. So even though they are falling towards the even though they are falling towards the even though they are falling towards the Earth, they're going so fast that as Earth, they're going so fast that as Earth, they're going so fast that as they fall towards the Earth, the Earth's they fall towards the Earth, the Earth's they fall towards the Earth, the Earth's surface curves away from them and surface curves away from them and surface curves away from them and therefore they never get any closer. So therefore they never get any closer. So therefore they never get any closer. So the space station and the astronauts the space station and the astronauts the space station and the astronauts inside are constantly accelerating inside are constantly accelerating inside are constantly accelerating towards the Earth's center, but they towards the Earth's center, but they towards the Earth's center, but they never get any closer. And because both never get any closer. And because both never get any closer. And because both objects are accelerating at the same objects are accelerating at the same objects are accelerating at the same rate, the astronauts feel weightless. rate, the astronauts feel weightless. rate, the astronauts feel weightless. They have this amazing sensation of They have this amazing sensation of They have this amazing sensation of floating.