Title: Make Plasma With Grapes In The Microwave!
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RwTjsRt0Fzo

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So today I'm at the University of Sydney So today I'm at the University of Sydney So today I'm at the University of Sydney with Steve Boosezie and we are exploring with Steve Boosezie and we are exploring with Steve Boosezie and we are exploring everyone's favorite state of matter, a everyone's favorite state of matter, a everyone's favorite state of matter, a plasma. plasma. plasma. Well, actually my favorite state of Well, actually my favorite state of Well, actually my favorite state of matter is the Bose Einstein condensate, matter is the Bose Einstein condensate, matter is the Bose Einstein condensate, but that's just me. but that's just me. but that's just me. That's for another episode. So for now, That's for another episode. So for now, That's for another episode. So for now, we are trying to replicate these videos we are trying to replicate these videos we are trying to replicate these videos that you can see on the web where people that you can see on the web where people that you can see on the web where people use a simple grape and a microwave to use a simple grape and a microwave to use a simple grape and a microwave to produce plasma. produce plasma. produce plasma. We took a grape and cut it part of the We took a grape and cut it part of the We took a grape and cut it part of the way through so you'd have two halves way through so you'd have two halves way through so you'd have two halves with a tiny little ismas of grape skin with a tiny little ismas of grape skin with a tiny little ismas of grape skin holding the two halves together. Put holding the two halves together. Put holding the two halves together. Put that in the microwave oven. Now try to that in the microwave oven. Now try to that in the microwave oven. Now try to prop that up so it's sitting in the prop that up so it's sitting in the prop that up so it's sitting in the middle. middle. middle. All set. All set. All set. Is this going to be dangerous? Is this going to be dangerous? Is this going to be dangerous? Uh, I don't think so. But, uh, we are Uh, I don't think so. But, uh, we are Uh, I don't think so. But, uh, we are experts, so be careful if you're trying experts, so be careful if you're trying experts, so be careful if you're trying this at home. this at home. this at home. And bingo. Where's the plasma? Where's the plasma? Where's the plasma? Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. There there's the plasma. Oh. Oh. Oh. Hey. Hey. Hey. Wow. Well, that was some pretty amazing Wow. Well, that was some pretty amazing Wow. Well, that was some pretty amazing plasma that we made in this microwave. plasma that we made in this microwave. plasma that we made in this microwave. Um, what is plasma for people who don't Um, what is plasma for people who don't Um, what is plasma for people who don't know? know? know? Okay. If you take a gas and you put lots Okay. If you take a gas and you put lots Okay. If you take a gas and you put lots of energy into it till it gets very hot of energy into it till it gets very hot of energy into it till it gets very hot and the particles are very, very and the particles are very, very and the particles are very, very energetic, you start to rip electrons energetic, you start to rip electrons energetic, you start to rip electrons off the molecules. So, you end up with a off the molecules. So, you end up with a off the molecules. So, you end up with a soup made up of negatively charged soup made up of negatively charged soup made up of negatively charged electrons mixed in but moving freely electrons mixed in but moving freely electrons mixed in but moving freely with a bunch of positively charged um with a bunch of positively charged um with a bunch of positively charged um air molecules. And why does that give air molecules. And why does that give air molecules. And why does that give off light? off light? off light? Well, anytime that you put energy into Well, anytime that you put energy into Well, anytime that you put energy into atoms and molecules, the electrons start atoms and molecules, the electrons start atoms and molecules, the electrons start moving around, changing orbits, and that moving around, changing orbits, and that moving around, changing orbits, and that kind of stuff. So, anytime the electrons kind of stuff. So, anytime the electrons kind of stuff. So, anytime the electrons are being excited and and and deexited, are being excited and and and deexited, are being excited and and and deexited, you're going to get light. you're going to get light. you're going to get light. Whoa. Who needs drugs? Whoa. Who needs drugs? Whoa. Who needs drugs? And we also imagine that it's very hot. And we also imagine that it's very hot. And we also imagine that it's very hot. So, it would be glowing white hot So, it would be glowing white hot So, it would be glowing white hot anyway. anyway. anyway. Yeah. Possibly. Also, some of the Yeah. Possibly. Also, some of the Yeah. Possibly. Also, some of the ingredients in in that plasma uh have ingredients in in that plasma uh have ingredients in in that plasma uh have actually been heated up very high, so actually been heated up very high, so actually been heated up very high, so they're incandescent. They just glow cuz they're incandescent. They just glow cuz they're incandescent. They just glow cuz they're hot. they're hot. they're hot. Don't know. Don't know. Don't know. So, so what did we find worked the best So, so what did we find worked the best So, so what did we find worked the best with microwaving our grape? What lessons with microwaving our grape? What lessons with microwaving our grape? What lessons did we learn? did we learn? did we learn? Okay, first thing we discovered was we Okay, first thing we discovered was we Okay, first thing we discovered was we got better results if we dried the grape got better results if we dried the grape got better results if we dried the grape up before we put it in. We found too up before we put it in. We found too up before we put it in. We found too much water gave off too much steam. They much water gave off too much steam. They much water gave off too much steam. They tend to extinguish the the plasma. tend to extinguish the the plasma. tend to extinguish the the plasma. And then Steve came up with a great idea And then Steve came up with a great idea And then Steve came up with a great idea of actually uh cutting the grape of actually uh cutting the grape of actually uh cutting the grape completely in half, but using these completely in half, but using these completely in half, but using these dangling flaps of uh grape skin dangling flaps of uh grape skin dangling flaps of uh grape skin and grafting them together, just laying and grafting them together, just laying and grafting them together, just laying them over the top of each other. them over the top of each other. them over the top of each other. And that seemed to work better because And that seemed to work better because And that seemed to work better because we could reduce the volume of the grape. we could reduce the volume of the grape. we could reduce the volume of the grape. And that seemed to to help. And that seemed to to help. And that seemed to to help. Yeah. But because we used smaller pieces Yeah. But because we used smaller pieces Yeah. But because we used smaller pieces of grape, so we had less steam, also of grape, so we had less steam, also of grape, so we had less steam, also less thermal mass and possibly more less less thermal mass and possibly more less less thermal mass and possibly more less grape absorbing less microwave energy, grape absorbing less microwave energy, grape absorbing less microwave energy, so we got higher fields. so we got higher fields. so we got higher fields. Oh, Oh, Oh, holy holy holy species. species. species. Oh yes. Did you see that fireball? Oh yes. Did you see that fireball? Oh yes. Did you see that fireball? That that was an example of multiple That that was an example of multiple That that was an example of multiple plasma. plasma. plasma. And then of course the trick was to try And then of course the trick was to try And then of course the trick was to try to capture the plasma so that we didn't to capture the plasma so that we didn't to capture the plasma so that we didn't do damage to the microwave for one thing do damage to the microwave for one thing do damage to the microwave for one thing and second of all so that we could and second of all so that we could and second of all so that we could observe it quite nicely in in a observe it quite nicely in in a observe it quite nicely in in a container but we had trouble with the container but we had trouble with the container but we had trouble with the glass that we were using the few glasses glass that we were using the few glasses glass that we were using the few glasses to get it to work. to get it to work. to get it to work. The guess is that the glass was The guess is that the glass was The guess is that the glass was absorbing too much of the microwave absorbing too much of the microwave absorbing too much of the microwave energy and so we weren't getting the energy and so we weren't getting the energy and so we weren't getting the very high fields you need to make the very high fields you need to make the very high fields you need to make the plasma. plasma. plasma. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh no. Oh no. Oh no. So we moved over to a plastic container So we moved over to a plastic container So we moved over to a plastic container which seemed to do much better. which seemed to do much better. which seemed to do much better. Yeah. If you can just tolerate the fact Yeah. If you can just tolerate the fact Yeah. If you can just tolerate the fact that the plastic container melted that the plastic container melted that the plastic container melted afterwards. afterwards. afterwards. Plastic container to capture the action Plastic container to capture the action Plastic container to capture the action and adventures. Look Look Look what go. The laws OF PHYSICS. go. The laws OF PHYSICS. go. The laws OF PHYSICS. YEAH. YEAH. YEAH. OH [screaming] YEAH, IT'S STILL GOING. OH [screaming] YEAH, IT'S STILL GOING. OH [screaming] YEAH, IT'S STILL GOING. [laughter] Gods Gods Gods of physics. of physics. of physics. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. [screaming] [screaming] [screaming] Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's still going. It's still going. It's still going. Do you smell that? Is that a new smell? Do you smell that? Is that a new smell? Do you smell that? Is that a new smell? Is that a melting plastic? Is that a melting plastic? Is that a melting plastic? Are you still filming? Are you still filming? Are you still filming? Oh my god. Hang on. Catch that. Look, Oh my god. Hang on. Catch that. Look, Oh my god. Hang on. Catch that. Look, it's got a smile. Even this Even the it's got a smile. Even this Even the it's got a smile. Even this Even the container's got a smiley face after that container's got a smiley face after that container's got a smiley face after that run. [laughter] run. [laughter] run. [laughter] Yeah, it's uh it was only like a one hit Yeah, it's uh it was only like a one hit Yeah, it's uh it was only like a one hit gig. So, uh what sort of future gig. So, uh what sort of future gig. So, uh what sort of future investigations would you like to do investigations would you like to do investigations would you like to do here? here? here? Okay. Now, in order to to understand Okay. Now, in order to to understand Okay. Now, in order to to understand exactly why this happens, um we really exactly why this happens, um we really exactly why this happens, um we really need need to be able to control the need need to be able to control the need need to be able to control the variables inside that grape. Okay. We we variables inside that grape. Okay. We we variables inside that grape. Okay. We we we can't control the ingredients of a we can't control the ingredients of a we can't control the ingredients of a grape. They come to us as is. So, what grape. They come to us as is. So, what grape. They come to us as is. So, what we'd like to do is make a an artificial we'd like to do is make a an artificial we'd like to do is make a an artificial grape. So, we I don't know get cotton grape. So, we I don't know get cotton grape. So, we I don't know get cotton balls. We can put uh conductive liquid balls. We can put uh conductive liquid balls. We can put uh conductive liquid in it. You know, we can put salty water in it. You know, we can put salty water in it. You know, we can put salty water in it. We can put grape juice. we and in it. We can put grape juice. we and in it. We can put grape juice. we and and control the volumes of these things. and control the volumes of these things. and control the volumes of these things. So, one by one we can actually um nail So, one by one we can actually um nail So, one by one we can actually um nail down the different uh variables and down the different uh variables and down the different uh variables and we'll have to find some some artificial we'll have to find some some artificial we'll have to find some some artificial skin to replace the grape skin. I don't skin to replace the grape skin. I don't skin to replace the grape skin. I don't know if it has to be grape skin. Maybe know if it has to be grape skin. Maybe know if it has to be grape skin. Maybe maybe a wet piece of paper might do the maybe a wet piece of paper might do the maybe a wet piece of paper might do the job. I don't know. job. I don't know. job. I don't know. Okay. So, you should look forward to Okay. So, you should look forward to Okay. So, you should look forward to that on another episode of Veritassium. that on another episode of Veritassium. that on another episode of Veritassium. Care for a grape. Care for a grape. Care for a grape. Thank you very much. Physics is tasty. Physics is tasty. Physics is tasty. Holy. [screaming] Oh, see what did I tell you? What did I Oh, see what did I tell you? What did I Oh, see what did I tell you? What did I tell you? [laughter] But wait, there's more. No, there's the But wait, there's more. No, there's the But wait, there's more. No, there's the epic visit.