Title: Misconceptions About Heat
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNGJ0WHXMyE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Today I'm going to bake this chocolate Today I'm going to bake this chocolate Today I'm going to bake this chocolate cake. Now those of you who know me know cake. Now those of you who know me know cake. Now those of you who know me know that the only reason I would do this is that the only reason I would do this is that the only reason I would do this is to prove a point. Earlier I was asking to prove a point. Earlier I was asking to prove a point. Earlier I was asking people to compare the temperatures of people to compare the temperatures of people to compare the temperatures of these two objects. A science book these two objects. A science book these two objects. A science book written by Isaac Asimov and an old metal written by Isaac Asimov and an old metal written by Isaac Asimov and an old metal hard drive. hard drive. hard drive. Can you compare their temperatures? Can you compare their temperatures? Can you compare their temperatures? This one I think. This one I think. This one I think. Yeah, that feels colder. Yeah, that feels colder. Yeah, that feels colder. Cold and it's room temperature. Cold and it's room temperature. Cold and it's room temperature. Can you tell me? Can you tell me? Can you tell me? You would say colder than that one? You would say colder than that one? You would say colder than that one? Yeah. What makes something hotter or Yeah. What makes something hotter or Yeah. What makes something hotter or colder? What what affects that? colder? What what affects that? colder? What what affects that? The the actual material. I mean, paper The the actual material. I mean, paper The the actual material. I mean, paper is warm and metal is cold. is warm and metal is cold. is warm and metal is cold. Both of these objects have been sitting Both of these objects have been sitting Both of these objects have been sitting here on the ground for quite a while. here on the ground for quite a while. here on the ground for quite a while. So, one might expect that they're at the So, one might expect that they're at the So, one might expect that they're at the same temperature. same temperature. same temperature. No, because this is a metal and that's No, because this is a metal and that's No, because this is a metal and that's paper. paper. paper. But what if I left that outside all day? But what if I left that outside all day? But what if I left that outside all day? Would it be 15°? Would it be 15°? Would it be 15°? No, because paper doesn't absorb cold. No, because paper doesn't absorb cold. No, because paper doesn't absorb cold. Doesn't absorb cold. Doesn't absorb cold. Doesn't absorb cold. No. Well, I've left books out, not all No. Well, I've left books out, not all No. Well, I've left books out, not all day, um, outdoors, and I can't say that day, um, outdoors, and I can't say that day, um, outdoors, and I can't say that I've noticed the book was cold when I've I've noticed the book was cold when I've I've noticed the book was cold when I've come to pick it up ever. come to pick it up ever. come to pick it up ever. What if I told you that these two What if I told you that these two What if I told you that these two objects are actually the same objects are actually the same objects are actually the same temperature? What would you say? temperature? What would you say? temperature? What would you say? Definitely not. If it's temperature Definitely not. If it's temperature Definitely not. If it's temperature right now, this is colder. right now, this is colder. right now, this is colder. So, let's say you're taking a cake out So, let's say you're taking a cake out So, let's say you're taking a cake out of the oven. of the oven. of the oven. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Would you be uh worried about touching Would you be uh worried about touching Would you be uh worried about touching the cake? the cake? the cake? Yes. Well, not the cake itself, but the Yes. Well, not the cake itself, but the Yes. Well, not the cake itself, but the actual teen around the cake, cuz it'll actual teen around the cake, cuz it'll actual teen around the cake, cuz it'll be hot. be hot. be hot. Yeah. But how does the temperature of Yeah. But how does the temperature of Yeah. But how does the temperature of the tin compare to the temperature of the tin compare to the temperature of the tin compare to the temperature of the cake? the cake? the cake? Well, the cake will be warm, like hot, Well, the cake will be warm, like hot, Well, the cake will be warm, like hot, but not as hot as a tin. but not as hot as a tin. but not as hot as a tin. The tin's hotter because it's metal. The tin's hotter because it's metal. The tin's hotter because it's metal. Metal metal holds the heat longer and Metal metal holds the heat longer and Metal metal holds the heat longer and holds the cold longer. holds the cold longer. holds the cold longer. Do you think the tin would be the same Do you think the tin would be the same Do you think the tin would be the same temperature as the cake? temperature as the cake? temperature as the cake? Well, you think it if it's been like in Well, you think it if it's been like in Well, you think it if it's been like in 200° C, it'd be the same. But it's 200° C, it'd be the same. But it's 200° C, it'd be the same. But it's somehow it just doesn't feel like it somehow it just doesn't feel like it somehow it just doesn't feel like it will burn with metal whereas my fingers will burn with metal whereas my fingers will burn with metal whereas my fingers will melt. But I mean, not if I stick my will melt. But I mean, not if I stick my will melt. But I mean, not if I stick my finger in the cake, it wouldn't burn as finger in the cake, it wouldn't burn as finger in the cake, it wouldn't burn as much. All right, it's time to take the much. All right, it's time to take the much. All right, it's time to take the cake out and find out if it's the same cake out and find out if it's the same cake out and find out if it's the same temperature as the tin. I have a meat temperature as the tin. I have a meat temperature as the tin. I have a meat thermometer with which to measure the thermometer with which to measure the thermometer with which to measure the the temperature of the cake. I'm not the temperature of the cake. I'm not the temperature of the cake. I'm not sure that's the most accurate way of sure that's the most accurate way of sure that's the most accurate way of doing it, but well, it's the only thing doing it, but well, it's the only thing doing it, but well, it's the only thing I've got. So, let's give it a shot. So, I've got. So, let's give it a shot. So, I've got. So, let's give it a shot. So, I tried to measure the temperature of I tried to measure the temperature of I tried to measure the temperature of the cake using a meat thermometer, but the cake using a meat thermometer, but the cake using a meat thermometer, but unfortunately, its temperature scale unfortunately, its temperature scale unfortunately, its temperature scale doesn't go high enough to allow me to doesn't go high enough to allow me to doesn't go high enough to allow me to accurately measure the temperature of accurately measure the temperature of accurately measure the temperature of the cake. You can actually hear the the cake. You can actually hear the the cake. You can actually hear the moment when I realized that my moment when I realized that my moment when I realized that my experiment wasn't going to work. experiment wasn't going to work. experiment wasn't going to work. Uhoh. Uhoh. Uhoh. So, now I'm back in Vancouver and I So, now I'm back in Vancouver and I So, now I'm back in Vancouver and I thought I'd bring in the big guns to thought I'd bring in the big guns to thought I'd bring in the big guns to help me sort out this experiment. And by help me sort out this experiment. And by help me sort out this experiment. And by the big guns, I of course mean uh my the big guns, I of course mean uh my the big guns, I of course mean uh my mom. mom. mom. So, Derek, I understand we're going to So, Derek, I understand we're going to So, Derek, I understand we're going to make this vanilla cake mix together and make this vanilla cake mix together and make this vanilla cake mix together and see what happens. see what happens. see what happens. We've got a secret weapon, which is this We've got a secret weapon, which is this We've got a secret weapon, which is this infrared thermometer, which can measure infrared thermometer, which can measure infrared thermometer, which can measure temperatures up to 300° C. So, we should temperatures up to 300° C. So, we should temperatures up to 300° C. So, we should have no problems with it. We just point have no problems with it. We just point have no problems with it. We just point it at a surface and it gives us a it at a surface and it gives us a it at a surface and it gives us a readout of the temperature of that readout of the temperature of that readout of the temperature of that surface. So, this should be perfect for surface. So, this should be perfect for surface. So, this should be perfect for measuring the temperature of the cake measuring the temperature of the cake measuring the temperature of the cake and the tin. Do you want to make a a and the tin. Do you want to make a a and the tin. Do you want to make a a prediction about the relative prediction about the relative prediction about the relative temperatures of the cake and the tin temperatures of the cake and the tin temperatures of the cake and the tin when we bring it out of the oven? when we bring it out of the oven? when we bring it out of the oven? Well, I really suspect that the tin is Well, I really suspect that the tin is Well, I really suspect that the tin is going to be a lot hotter than the cake. going to be a lot hotter than the cake. going to be a lot hotter than the cake. You can really not handle the tin at You can really not handle the tin at You can really not handle the tin at all. So, I I reckon that's what's going all. So, I I reckon that's what's going all. So, I I reckon that's what's going to happen. to happen. to happen. Okay. Well, I think they're both going Okay. Well, I think they're both going Okay. Well, I think they're both going to be the same temperature, but I could to be the same temperature, but I could to be the same temperature, but I could be wrong. So, we're going to have to do be wrong. So, we're going to have to do be wrong. So, we're going to have to do the experiment and find out. the experiment and find out. the experiment and find out. All right, let's get mixing. All right, let's get mixing. All right, let's get mixing. Okay, so it's been about a half an hour Okay, so it's been about a half an hour Okay, so it's been about a half an hour and the cake is cooked. It's ready to and the cake is cooked. It's ready to and the cake is cooked. It's ready to come out. come out. come out. Yeah, we're all ready to go. Yeah, we're all ready to go. Yeah, we're all ready to go. That is your your expert opinion as the That is your your expert opinion as the That is your your expert opinion as the master baker here. [laughter] master baker here. [laughter] master baker here. [laughter] Yes, I think so. Yes, I think so. Yes, I think so. Okay, we're going to take the cake out Okay, we're going to take the cake out Okay, we're going to take the cake out of the oven and we're going to check the of the oven and we're going to check the of the oven and we're going to check the temperature of the tin and the cake. temperature of the tin and the cake. temperature of the tin and the cake. Let's do it. Let's do it. Let's do it. Okay. Ooh, it looks like a good cake. Ooh, it looks like a good cake. Ooh, it looks like a good cake. Yeah, not a bad one. Okay. So, let's Yeah, not a bad one. Okay. So, let's Yeah, not a bad one. Okay. So, let's measure the temperature of the cake. We measure the temperature of the cake. We measure the temperature of the cake. We have have have 108.9 108.9 108.9 and the temperature of the tin and the temperature of the tin and the temperature of the tin 118.6 118.6 118.6 but dropping but dropping but dropping over here over here over here 108.1. 108.1. 108.1. So, we have uh what would you say about So, we have uh what would you say about So, we have uh what would you say about the temperature of the cake and the tin? the temperature of the cake and the tin? the temperature of the cake and the tin? Pretty close. Much closer than I Pretty close. Much closer than I Pretty close. Much closer than I expected. expected. expected. H. They're quite similar. They're both H. They're quite similar. They're both H. They're quite similar. They're both around 110 around 110 around 110 uh Celsius. That's my point is that the uh Celsius. That's my point is that the uh Celsius. That's my point is that the tin and the cake are the same tin and the cake are the same tin and the cake are the same temperature, but the tin is going to temperature, but the tin is going to temperature, but the tin is going to conduct heat to your hand much faster conduct heat to your hand much faster conduct heat to your hand much faster than the cake. So, the tin would burn than the cake. So, the tin would burn than the cake. So, the tin would burn you, but the cake would not, but they're you, but the cake would not, but they're you, but the cake would not, but they're the same temperature. What if I were to the same temperature. What if I were to the same temperature. What if I were to impress upon you that they are in fact impress upon you that they are in fact impress upon you that they are in fact the same temperature? the same temperature? the same temperature? I'll take your word for it. I'll take your word for it. I'll take your word for it. And and that in fact that these two are And and that in fact that these two are And and that in fact that these two are the same temperature. the same temperature. the same temperature. Yeah, I don't agree with that. Yeah, I don't agree with that. Yeah, I don't agree with that. No, No, No, you don't think those are the same you don't think those are the same you don't think those are the same temperature? temperature? temperature? No. No. No. Really? I just can't believe this book Really? I just can't believe this book Really? I just can't believe this book is 15°. It just doesn't feel it. is 15°. It just doesn't feel it. is 15°. It just doesn't feel it. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] I just can't believe it. In truth, I just can't believe it. In truth, I just can't believe it. In truth, there's no difference in the temperature there's no difference in the temperature there's no difference in the temperature between these two objects. If they've between these two objects. If they've between these two objects. If they've been in the same surroundings for a long been in the same surroundings for a long been in the same surroundings for a long period of time, they come to thermal period of time, they come to thermal period of time, they come to thermal equilibrium with their surroundings, equilibrium with their surroundings, equilibrium with their surroundings, which means they're both at the same which means they're both at the same which means they're both at the same temperature. But the metal feels colder temperature. But the metal feels colder temperature. But the metal feels colder because it's able to conduct heat away because it's able to conduct heat away because it's able to conduct heat away from my hand faster than the book. So, from my hand faster than the book. So, from my hand faster than the book. So, just because an object feels colder, just because an object feels colder, just because an object feels colder, that doesn't mean that it actually has a that doesn't mean that it actually has a that doesn't mean that it actually has a lower temperature. It may just mean that lower temperature. It may just mean that lower temperature. It may just mean that it's conducting heat away from your hand it's conducting heat away from your hand it's conducting heat away from your hand faster. faster. faster. I see. Oh, that's interesting. I just I see. Oh, that's interesting. I just I see. Oh, that's interesting. I just learned something. [laughter]