Title: Northern Lights From 100,000 ft!
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5O-wAYKBBSc

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en This is the most spectacular natural This is the most spectacular natural This is the most spectacular natural light show on Earth. light show on Earth. light show on Earth. These images, filmed from the These images, filmed from the These images, filmed from the International Space Station, capture International Space Station, capture International Space Station, capture what has drawn people from around the what has drawn people from around the what has drawn people from around the world for centuries. I have come all the way from Australia I have come all the way from Australia I have come all the way from Australia to see it for myself. Welcome to Alaska. to see it for myself. Welcome to Alaska. to see it for myself. Welcome to Alaska. I'm just outside of Fairbanks and I'm I'm just outside of Fairbanks and I'm I'm just outside of Fairbanks and I'm trying to find the northern lights, the trying to find the northern lights, the trying to find the northern lights, the Aurora Borealis. As the sun enters the peak of its As the sun enters the peak of its As the sun enters the peak of its 11-year sunspot cycle, it ejects 11-year sunspot cycle, it ejects 11-year sunspot cycle, it ejects high-speed electrons and protons into high-speed electrons and protons into high-speed electrons and protons into space. space. space. Deflected by the Earth's magnetic field, Deflected by the Earth's magnetic field, Deflected by the Earth's magnetic field, they collide with the upper atmosphere they collide with the upper atmosphere they collide with the upper atmosphere near the poles, producing the aurora. But with spectacular lights also comes But with spectacular lights also comes But with spectacular lights also comes the threat of disruption to our the threat of disruption to our the threat of disruption to our technological infrastructure. technological infrastructure. technological infrastructure. Charges streaming in from the sun can Charges streaming in from the sun can Charges streaming in from the sun can damage satellites, cause extensive power damage satellites, cause extensive power damage satellites, cause extensive power outages, and disrupt the flight paths of outages, and disrupt the flight paths of outages, and disrupt the flight paths of planes around the poles. planes around the poles. planes around the poles. Scientists warned that unless we find Scientists warned that unless we find Scientists warned that unless we find out more about solar storms, we are out more about solar storms, we are out more about solar storms, we are extremely vulnerable to a geomagnetic extremely vulnerable to a geomagnetic extremely vulnerable to a geomagnetic catastrophe. It's fed by the glaciers of the Alaska It's fed by the glaciers of the Alaska It's fed by the glaciers of the Alaska mountain range. As you can see, mountain range. As you can see, mountain range. As you can see, to further this research, I'm joining a to further this research, I'm joining a to further this research, I'm joining a team of scientists, teachers, and team of scientists, teachers, and team of scientists, teachers, and students. students. students. Today, we're flying over the snow Today, we're flying over the snow Today, we're flying over the snow coververed mountains of Denali National coververed mountains of Denali National coververed mountains of Denali National Park to test out our gear in spectacular Park to test out our gear in spectacular Park to test out our gear in spectacular surrounds. surrounds. surrounds. [Music] [Music] [Music] So, what sort of research are you doing? So, what sort of research are you doing? So, what sort of research are you doing? Yeah, well, uh, we typically do high Yeah, well, uh, we typically do high Yeah, well, uh, we typically do high altitude balloon launches. That's sort altitude balloon launches. That's sort altitude balloon launches. That's sort of the gist of project ether for of the gist of project ether for of the gist of project ether for students especially that don't have students especially that don't have students especially that don't have access uh to the near space environment. access uh to the near space environment. access uh to the near space environment. You know, we we try to open that up. You know, we we try to open that up. You know, we we try to open that up. We're trying to further the science of We're trying to further the science of We're trying to further the science of of auroral research and and looking at of auroral research and and looking at of auroral research and and looking at the details of how sort of the global the details of how sort of the global the details of how sort of the global electrical circuit connects and how the electrical circuit connects and how the electrical circuit connects and how the aurora plays into that and causes this, aurora plays into that and causes this, aurora plays into that and causes this, you know, beautiful aurora and and sort you know, beautiful aurora and and sort you know, beautiful aurora and and sort of the physics involved there. Light her of the physics involved there. Light her of the physics involved there. Light her up. Using a full tank of helium, the team Using a full tank of helium, the team Using a full tank of helium, the team inflates a latex weather balloon to 2 m inflates a latex weather balloon to 2 m inflates a latex weather balloon to 2 m in diameter. This provides enough lift in diameter. This provides enough lift in diameter. This provides enough lift for a 6 to 7 kg payload. for a 6 to 7 kg payload. for a 6 to 7 kg payload. We're going to send this up uh well We're going to send this up uh well We're going to send this up uh well about 25 km or so. This will help us about 25 km or so. This will help us about 25 km or so. This will help us assess wind conditions in the upper assess wind conditions in the upper assess wind conditions in the upper atmosphere in preparation for tonight's atmosphere in preparation for tonight's atmosphere in preparation for tonight's launch into the aurora. launch into the aurora. launch into the aurora. Liftoff. That's actually a really good buoyancy. That's actually a really good buoyancy. That's actually a really good buoyancy. Just a little bit of lift. Just a little bit of lift. Just a little bit of lift. When it goes up, this latex is flexible When it goes up, this latex is flexible When it goes up, this latex is flexible until it keeps expanding and expanding until it keeps expanding and expanding until it keeps expanding and expanding expanding. You go from about 6 or 8 feet expanding. You go from about 6 or 8 feet expanding. You go from about 6 or 8 feet up to about 30 ft diameter. So the, you up to about 30 ft diameter. So the, you up to about 30 ft diameter. So the, you know, 10 m. So you're the size of a know, 10 m. So you're the size of a know, 10 m. So you're the size of a small house at that point. You know, eventually you reach some limit where it eventually you reach some limit where it eventually you reach some limit where it just can't keep expanding. And then it just can't keep expanding. And then it just can't keep expanding. And then it pops and then you fall back down and uh pops and then you fall back down and uh pops and then you fall back down and uh we fall by parachute. we fall by parachute. we fall by parachute. The recovered footage provides a The recovered footage provides a The recovered footage provides a stunning view from the edge of space. But the real challenge is launching a But the real challenge is launching a But the real challenge is launching a weather balloon into the aurora at weather balloon into the aurora at weather balloon into the aurora at night. night. night. The conditions haven't been ideal The conditions haven't been ideal The conditions haven't been ideal because tonight it's a bit cloudy, a bit because tonight it's a bit cloudy, a bit because tonight it's a bit cloudy, a bit hazy, and we've got a moon out which is hazy, and we've got a moon out which is hazy, and we've got a moon out which is nearly full. So, it makes it very nearly full. So, it makes it very nearly full. So, it makes it very difficult to spot these northern lights. difficult to spot these northern lights. difficult to spot these northern lights. 3 2 1. 3 2 1. 3 2 1. The balloon must rise into the The balloon must rise into the The balloon must rise into the stratosphere at just the right moment to stratosphere at just the right moment to stratosphere at just the right moment to catch the intermittent aurora in action. [Music] [Music] [Music] The next morning, we're on the hunt for The next morning, we're on the hunt for The next morning, we're on the hunt for the payload. From 30 balloons, only one caught sight From 30 balloons, only one caught sight From 30 balloons, only one caught sight of the aurora. of the aurora. of the aurora. This is the first shot of the aurora This is the first shot of the aurora This is the first shot of the aurora from a weather balloon at nearly eye from a weather balloon at nearly eye from a weather balloon at nearly eye level. level. level. [Music] [Music] [Music] For them to build some sort of rig, put For them to build some sort of rig, put For them to build some sort of rig, put a camera on it, touch it, lick it, smell a camera on it, touch it, lick it, smell a camera on it, touch it, lick it, smell it, send it up 100,000 ft to the edge of it, send it up 100,000 ft to the edge of it, send it up 100,000 ft to the edge of space and get it back. Um, you know, space and get it back. Um, you know, space and get it back. Um, you know, it's really awesome to see those those it's really awesome to see those those it's really awesome to see those those pictures and to see that, you know, your pictures and to see that, you know, your pictures and to see that, you know, your device went up there device went up there device went up there with young scientists taking up the with young scientists taking up the with young scientists taking up the challenge. These images and the data challenge. These images and the data challenge. These images and the data gathered provide just a glimpse into the gathered provide just a glimpse into the gathered provide just a glimpse into the future of research on the aurora and how future of research on the aurora and how future of research on the aurora and how solar emissions affect our lives. solar emissions affect our lives. solar emissions affect our lives. [Music]