Title: Physics Nobel Prize 2011 - Brian Schmidt
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YHBvOOX3RJQ

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en There are few things in the world that There are few things in the world that There are few things in the world that seem more constant than the stars in the seem more constant than the stars in the seem more constant than the stars in the night sky. If you look up at the Milky night sky. If you look up at the Milky night sky. If you look up at the Milky Way, you will see the same thing that Way, you will see the same thing that Way, you will see the same thing that people have looked at for thousands people have looked at for thousands people have looked at for thousands [music] and thousands of years. But as [music] and thousands of years. But as [music] and thousands of years. But as Professor Schmidt found out, the Professor Schmidt found out, the Professor Schmidt found out, the universe is a much more dynamic place universe is a much more dynamic place universe is a much more dynamic place than we give it credit for. [music] When than we give it credit for. [music] When than we give it credit for. [music] When Albert Einstein was doing his theory of Albert Einstein was doing his theory of Albert Einstein was doing his theory of gravity, his theory of gravity said the gravity, his theory of gravity said the gravity, his theory of gravity said the universe should be in motion. He didn't universe should be in motion. He didn't universe should be in motion. He didn't know if it was getting bigger or getting know if it was getting bigger or getting know if it was getting bigger or getting smaller. [music] but his uh universe smaller. [music] but his uh universe smaller. [music] but his uh universe should have been in motion. And yet he should have been in motion. And yet he should have been in motion. And yet he looked around and said, "Well, the looked around and said, "Well, the looked around and said, "Well, the astronomers tell me that the universe is astronomers tell me that the universe is astronomers tell me that the universe is pretty static." Now, there were hints. pretty static." Now, there were hints. pretty static." Now, there were hints. In 1916, a guy by the name of Vesto In 1916, a guy by the name of Vesto In 1916, a guy by the name of Vesto Sliper saw that all of the galaxies in Sliper saw that all of the galaxies in Sliper saw that all of the galaxies in the sky were moving away from the Milky the sky were moving away from the Milky the sky were moving away from the Milky Way. [music] And so, that was a real Way. [music] And so, that was a real Way. [music] And so, that was a real funny measurement back then and actually funny measurement back then and actually funny measurement back then and actually was indicating the motion of the was indicating the motion of the was indicating the motion of the universe. But how did Sifer know that universe. But how did Sifer know that universe. But how did Sifer know that the galaxies were [music] moving away the galaxies were [music] moving away the galaxies were [music] moving away from us? Well, he saw that their light from us? Well, he saw that their light from us? Well, he saw that their light was redshifted. If an object is moving was redshifted. If an object is moving was redshifted. If an object is moving away from us, its light [music] appears away from us, its light [music] appears away from us, its light [music] appears more red. If it's moving towards us, its more red. If it's moving towards us, its more red. If it's moving towards us, its light appears more blue. And virtually light appears more blue. And virtually light appears more blue. And virtually all of the galaxies Sliper looked at all of the galaxies Sliper looked at all of the galaxies Sliper looked at were redshifted. But it took till Hubble were redshifted. But it took till Hubble were redshifted. But it took till Hubble in 1929 really to put it all together. in 1929 really to put it all together. in 1929 really to put it all together. And he went out and he measured And he went out and he measured And he went out and he measured distances to the nearest galaxies. Now, distances to the nearest galaxies. Now, distances to the nearest galaxies. Now, Sliper knew that these galaxies were Sliper knew that these galaxies were Sliper knew that these galaxies were moving away. Hubble looked at the stars moving away. Hubble looked at the stars moving away. Hubble looked at the stars in them. And what he noticed was that in them. And what he noticed was that in them. And what he noticed was that the faster that the object was moving the faster that the object was moving the faster that the object was moving away from us, the fainter the [music] away from us, the fainter the [music] away from us, the fainter the [music] stars were. Now, stars become fainter stars were. Now, stars become fainter stars were. Now, stars become fainter when they're further away. So, he said, when they're further away. So, he said, when they're further away. So, he said, "Well, let's just assume all those stars "Well, let's just assume all those stars "Well, let's just assume all those stars are about the same." Hubble relied on are about the same." Hubble relied on are about the same." Hubble relied on what's called a standard candle. A what's called a standard candle. A what's called a standard candle. A standard candle is an object in space standard candle is an object in space standard candle is an object in space that always gives off the same amount of that always gives off the same amount of that always gives off the same amount of light. But as that light spreads out light. But as that light spreads out light. But as that light spreads out through space, it becomes less intense. through space, it becomes less intense. through space, it becomes less intense. So, by looking at the intensity of the So, by looking at the intensity of the So, by looking at the intensity of the light, you can determine how far away light, you can determine how far away light, you can determine how far away the candle is. So, if I walk out through the candle is. So, if I walk out through the candle is. So, if I walk out through this field behind me, you'll be able to this field behind me, you'll be able to this field behind me, you'll be able to tell how far away I am [music] by how tell how far away I am [music] by how tell how far away I am [music] by how bright the candle light looks. By seeing bright the candle light looks. By seeing bright the candle light looks. By seeing that the stars were fainter, he could that the stars were fainter, he could that the stars were fainter, he could infer that the galaxies were further infer that the galaxies were further infer that the galaxies were further away. So, the idea that the further away away. So, the idea that the further away away. So, the idea that the further away an object was, the faster it was moving, an object was, the faster it was moving, an object was, the faster it was moving, he said that means the universe is he said that means the universe is he said that means the universe is expanding. And you can think of it as if expanding. And you can think of it as if expanding. And you can think of it as if you put little dots on a balloon. You you put little dots on a balloon. You you put little dots on a balloon. You blow the balloon up. Every dot moves blow the balloon up. Every dot moves blow the balloon up. Every dot moves away from every other dot. And the away from every other dot. And the away from every other dot. And the further the two dots are away, the further the two dots are away, the further the two dots are away, the faster they're actually moving away from faster they're actually moving away from faster they're actually moving away from each other when you blow the balloon up. each other when you blow the balloon up. each other when you blow the balloon up. It's just like the expanding balloon. It's just like the expanding balloon. It's just like the expanding balloon. The expanding universe does the same The expanding universe does the same The expanding universe does the same thing. I wanted to do an experiment thing. I wanted to do an experiment thing. I wanted to do an experiment which I thought I could explain to my which I thought I could explain to my which I thought I could explain to my grandmother and measuring the ultimate grandmother and measuring the ultimate grandmother and measuring the ultimate fate of the universe struck me as being fate of the universe struck me as being fate of the universe struck me as being a good experiment to do that. So when we a good experiment to do that. So when we a good experiment to do that. So when we started this experiment in 1994, we started this experiment in 1994, we started this experiment in 1994, we wanted to measure the ultimate fate of wanted to measure the ultimate fate of wanted to measure the ultimate fate of the universe by measuring how fast the the universe by measuring how fast the the universe by measuring how fast the universe was slowing down over time. universe was slowing down over time. universe was slowing down over time. That allowed us to see how much gravity That allowed us to see how much gravity That allowed us to see how much gravity there was in the universe. there was in the universe. there was in the universe. For his standard candle, Professor For his standard candle, Professor For his standard candle, Professor Schmidt used type 1A supernova. Schmidt used type 1A supernova. Schmidt used type 1A supernova. So type 1a supernovi are explosions of So type 1a supernovi are explosions of So type 1a supernovi are explosions of white dwarf stars. So, a white dwarf white dwarf stars. So, a white dwarf white dwarf stars. So, a white dwarf star is the thing that the center of our star is the thing that the center of our star is the thing that the center of our sun will become once it uses all of its sun will become once it uses all of its sun will become once it uses all of its nuclear fuel. So, it turns out that the nuclear fuel. So, it turns out that the nuclear fuel. So, it turns out that the outer parts of the sun will blow off in outer parts of the sun will blow off in outer parts of the sun will blow off in about 5 billion years. The center of it about 5 billion years. The center of it about 5 billion years. The center of it will collapse down to something that is will collapse down to something that is will collapse down to something that is uh about the size of the earth. And so uh about the size of the earth. And so uh about the size of the earth. And so that star is a ticking nuclear bomb if that star is a ticking nuclear bomb if that star is a ticking nuclear bomb if it can be made to grow to about 1.4 it can be made to grow to about 1.4 it can be made to grow to about 1.4 times [music] the mass of our sun. So times [music] the mass of our sun. So times [music] the mass of our sun. So our sun will never do that. It doesn't our sun will never do that. It doesn't our sun will never do that. It doesn't have anyone to provide that mass. have anyone to provide that mass. have anyone to provide that mass. [music] [music] [music] But if our sun was born as a binary But if our sun was born as a binary But if our sun was born as a binary star, then when our sun would become the star, then when our sun would become the star, then when our sun would become the white dwarf, this star could put white dwarf, this star could put white dwarf, this star could put material onto [music] that, cause it to material onto [music] that, cause it to material onto [music] that, cause it to grow. At some point the star ignites and grow. At some point the star ignites and grow. At some point the star ignites and the whole thing [music] in a period of the whole thing [music] in a period of the whole thing [music] in a period of second goes kaboom second goes kaboom second goes kaboom with the power of about five billion with the power of about five billion with the power of about five billion times what our sun puts out. When one of times what our sun puts out. When one of times what our sun puts out. When one of these things explode they go from being these things explode they go from being these things explode they go from being something that's very very faint. Over something that's very very faint. Over something that's very very faint. Over the course of about 20 days they rise to the course of about 20 days they rise to the course of about 20 days they rise to 5 billion times the brightness of the 5 billion times the brightness of the 5 billion times the brightness of the sun and then they slowly fade into sun and then they slowly fade into sun and then they slowly fade into oblivion. We can measure how bright they oblivion. We can measure how bright they oblivion. We can measure how bright they are to about 7%. And that is very are to about 7%. And that is very are to about 7%. And that is very precise. That's better than a light precise. That's better than a light precise. That's better than a light bulb. So we have these light bulbs, but bulb. So we have these light bulbs, but bulb. So we have these light bulbs, but these are light bulbs that are, you these are light bulbs that are, you these are light bulbs that are, you know, roughly 43 orders of magnitude know, roughly 43 orders of magnitude know, roughly 43 orders of magnitude brighter than a light bulb here on brighter than a light bulb here on brighter than a light bulb here on Earth. And so they are really, really Earth. And so they are really, really Earth. And so they are really, really bright and we can see them all the way bright and we can see them all the way bright and we can see them all the way across the universe. So by measuring how across the universe. So by measuring how across the universe. So by measuring how bright these objects are, we can measure bright these objects are, we can measure bright these objects are, we can measure distance like Hubble tried to with distance like Hubble tried to with distance like Hubble tried to with stars, but we do it much, much more stars, but we do it much, much more stars, but we do it much, much more accurately. We were going to go through accurately. We were going to go through accurately. We were going to go through and measure a bunch of these exploding and measure a bunch of these exploding and measure a bunch of these exploding stars. We were going to measure how fast stars. We were going to measure how fast stars. We were going to measure how fast they were moving away from us or their they were moving away from us or their they were moving away from us or their red shift as we call it. And we were red shift as we call it. And we were red shift as we call it. And we were going to put that together and we're going to put that together and we're going to put that together and we're going to do Hubble's experiment nearby. going to do Hubble's experiment nearby. going to do Hubble's experiment nearby. And then we're going to do it a long And then we're going to do it a long And then we're going to do it a long ways away. And of course, we're looking ways away. And of course, we're looking ways away. And of course, we're looking into the universe's past when we look a into the universe's past when we look a into the universe's past when we look a long ways away. So, we're going to long ways away. So, we're going to long ways away. So, we're going to measure how fast the universe was measure how fast the universe was measure how fast the universe was expanding in the past and in the present expanding in the past and in the present expanding in the past and in the present and see how that's changing. And we're and see how that's changing. And we're and see how that's changing. And we're going to see how fast it was slowing going to see how fast it was slowing going to see how fast it was slowing down. then therefore weigh the universe down. then therefore weigh the universe down. then therefore weigh the universe and that would tell us its ultimate and that would tell us its ultimate and that would tell us its ultimate fate. The universe going to expand fate. The universe going to expand fate. The universe going to expand forever or is it going to slow down forever or is it going to slow down forever or is it going to slow down enough, reach a maximum size and then enough, reach a maximum size and then enough, reach a maximum size and then collapse and go into the ganab gibb collapse and go into the ganab gibb collapse and go into the ganab gibb that's the big bag backwards. So at the that's the big bag backwards. So at the that's the big bag backwards. So at the end of 1997 um Adam Ree uh co-winners end of 1997 um Adam Ree uh co-winners end of 1997 um Adam Ree uh co-winners one of the members of the team was one of the members of the team was one of the members of the team was showing me the results he was getting showing me the results he was getting showing me the results he was getting and they were strange. They were showing and they were strange. They were showing and they were strange. They were showing that the universe was not slowing down that the universe was not slowing down that the universe was not slowing down at all. was speeding up. So, of course, at all. was speeding up. So, of course, at all. was speeding up. So, of course, we kind of figured that we had made a we kind of figured that we had made a we kind of figured that we had made a mistake as one does. Initially, it mistake as one does. Initially, it mistake as one does. Initially, it wasn't too bad. I just figured out wasn't too bad. I just figured out wasn't too bad. I just figured out that'll be an easy mistake. We'll find that'll be an easy mistake. We'll find that'll be an easy mistake. We'll find it. And I have to say there was a it. And I have to say there was a it. And I have to say there was a context that the other team, the context that the other team, the context that the other team, the supernova cosmology project, had put out supernova cosmology project, had put out supernova cosmology project, had put out a paper a paper a paper um in 1997 saying that the universe was um in 1997 saying that the universe was um in 1997 saying that the universe was slowing down and it it was slowing down slowing down and it it was slowing down slowing down and it it was slowing down pretty quickly. And then when we get pretty quickly. And then when we get pretty quickly. And then when we get this measurement saying the universe is this measurement saying the universe is this measurement saying the universe is speeding up, you're saying going, "Oh, speeding up, you're saying going, "Oh, speeding up, you're saying going, "Oh, geez. Okay, we'll just find the m the geez. Okay, we'll just find the m the geez. Okay, we'll just find the m the the mistake. But after a while, you're the mistake. But after a while, you're the mistake. But after a while, you're like, well, there's no mistake going like, well, there's no mistake going like, well, there's no mistake going away. And then you start getting away. And then you start getting away. And then you start getting perplexed because you're saying, God, perplexed because you're saying, God, perplexed because you're saying, God, we're going to have to go out and not we're going to have to go out and not we're going to have to go out and not only tell the world something crazy, the only tell the world something crazy, the only tell the world something crazy, the universe is speeding up. But that we are universe is speeding up. But that we are universe is speeding up. But that we are getting a completely different answer getting a completely different answer getting a completely different answer than the other team is getting something than the other team is getting something than the other team is getting something completely sensible. So I was concerned, completely sensible. So I was concerned, completely sensible. So I was concerned, definitely concerned. definitely concerned. definitely concerned. We think the solution to this is that We think the solution to this is that We think the solution to this is that the universe is made up of 73% of the universe is made up of 73% of the universe is made up of 73% of something that causes gravity to work in something that causes gravity to work in something that causes gravity to work in reverse. Something Einstein called the reverse. Something Einstein called the reverse. Something Einstein called the cosmological constant and what we now cosmological constant and what we now cosmological constant and what we now call dark energy. So, how is the call dark energy. So, how is the call dark energy. So, how is the universe going to end? Well, it seems universe going to end? Well, it seems universe going to end? Well, it seems it's going to go a little something like it's going to go a little something like it's going to go a little something like this. this. this. [panting] [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] [sighs]