Title: Post-Truth Why Facts Don't Matter Anymore
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dvk2PQNcg8w

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en This is the challenge of a YouTuber, which is, you know, pushing the record button and actually filming something. Because you never know: "Are people going to hate it?" Or "Is it good enough?" Have you thought through what you're going to say. I've not thought through what I'm going to say... (Laughter) Ok, so I wanted to talk about the question: Why is it that right now, when it is really easy to get access to facts, and information Where you could just pull up your phone and look up anything in the world... Why is it now that we have the most access to facts, do facts mean the least? Why does fake news spread now. Why are we more polarized now than ever before and what I have to kind of admit to you is that I was a real optimist. Maybe I was naive about the internet, but my thinking about having an international communication system whereby anyone anywhere can share anything and anyone anywhere regardless of say their education background or their class standing can get access to real information through wikipedia ok my thinking was the internet was going to make everyone happier and more informed more educated I and probably more tolerant of others around them, and the reason why I think that the internet should make people more tolerant is because it should expose people to people who are not like them. Right? I mean is this is crazy! My thinking is that as we have a platform to communicate with each other people in diverse places people with different interest from us and we all have the ability to sort of debate and agree upon what is true we all would become more accepting of the facts. Maybe I'm ranting on about this too much. Is too much? Ok, so we can edit we can edit (the video) so I guess the point is in summary, I thought that the internet would make the world more connected more tolerant more educated and more true like more agreed upon the facts and the way things are. And for a while I think there were signs that this was happening. There was the Arab Spring where you know people in countries that had been kind of dictatorship for people who've been oppressed for rising up there was the approval of gay marriage in a number of countries there were agreed upon climate agreements that seem to suggest the whole international community was coming together there are things like my youtube channel where there can be four million people who can watch or subscribe to a channel that's about information about learning new things about the universe. Right? The whole rise of smart content on youtube I took as an indication that things were going in the right direction that here we can get communities together who are all interested in the same sort of the in the same quick high-level phenomena you know the same like if I made a TV show I could never convince anyone to make a an episode about interpretations of quantum mechanics I could never convince someone to make a video about pilot wave theory and go in as much depth as I went into my videos but on the internet you can find that audience because you can aggregate across the whole world so little niche audiences across every country can all come together and say you know we want to learn this and we can support this sort of enterprise you guys an agreement ok now here's the problem, what I didn't think about was that other communities can form. Communities where people are particular agendas ideological or religious or you know people with extreme biases normally they're not much of a force to reckon with because they are diluted in our populations but on the internet just like the people who love physics people who hate science or people with differing ideologies and people who are intolerant can find each other and they can come together into these camps so I think that starts to suggest why we have the problem that we have today and then what do people do once they've found their communities once they found their people well we have meetups but we also we share things with each other online and you can think about some communities that are really innocous like the communities of people who are cat lovers who love sharing like pictures of kittens and then someone gets the idea to write like a really cute phrase like "i can haz cheezburger" on a picture of a kitten and then that little image tickles our brains in a way that is you're really strong and really incredible and then that spreads throughout the internet and what you have in essence is kind of evolution taking place and evolution of ideas on the internet and so I guess what I mean is you know one person can post this picture of a cat and then people can vary the phrases that are on it and the the best phrase is going to win out and get itself replicated and shared across the web more than any other, and the same thing happens with ideological arguments right if there's some sort of debate that's happening on the internet different versions of arguments can pop up and when you think about two groups on the internet debating they're not really debating each other each community creates what they think the opponent's argument is and then people within that community can tweak that argument to make it worse and worse and worse to make it but the most awful version of itself that pushes our buttons and when it pushes our buttons then we share it with everyone we know and we say look at the other side is talking about look at how awful it is and we keep evolving the ideas to make them really really bad those are the ones that that gets shared and spread just like an evolution we are evolving arguments to make them the worst form of themselves and then to make the the pushback you know even worse and that I think is leading to this polarization and what's worse the internet is organized by algorithms, algorithms that are designed to take the things that are most engaged with, that most push our buttons that get us going and get a sharing and liking or hating and they promote those even further and this I think is where something like fake news comes in how is it possible that during the last election cycle in the U.S. more fake news was spread and shared than real news that is extraordinary and I think it happens because the Internet allows groups of people to come together who have really particular views it allows them to share things with each other even sharing what they think the opponent's argument is tweaking it ever so slightly doing all of these little mutations little alterations and finding the ones that push our buttons the most and then those are the ones that get shared those are the ones that get liked and hated and everything and those are the ones the algorithm elevates the very top, so rather than the internet bringing us together rather than us converging around the facts instead the Internet allows us to divide ourselves into factions and to have this crazy evolution of arguments which is facilitated by the algorithms pushing us ever further apart and that is the the best that I've been able to reason about why we now care less about facts than we ever did before because deep down each one of us is based on confirmation bias we naturally go out into our world and we seek things that agree with what we think rather than looking for things that disagree with what we think that's an innate human trait as you can see my video can you solve this so it's upsetting and I think we need to find a way to overcome this division and find a way to agree again on what is truth and what is not thank you. (applause) Alright, alright, so are there questions? Anyone a question or comment we have a gentleman down the front yes I'm you know that has a video on cyber balkanization I've heard it from Vsauce is very useful term. say it again, cyber vulcanization? Balkanization. Balkanization? Yeah the 'spliternet' you know everything so the 'splinternet' and i love it! Cyber balkanization. I don't know what balkanization is... I guess it has something to do with the political situation in The Balkans Oh cyber balkanization yeah yeah yeahs shout-out to CGP Grey's video here yes this idea that you should try you should think of your opinions like papers in a box if you find another opinion that is better than the opinion that you have in the box you should switch it out is not the believers you are not their opinions opinions are just like stuff to carry with you that should be easily changed very good point I also I should cite CGP Grey's video about the evolution of ideas because I was strongly influenced by that video I think it's one of his best and most important videos. yes so mechanics that involves strong ideas that polarize people do you think there's a way to utilize this mechanic to make danger better to bring us all together to not being pushed around but it by utilizing to better stuff. Right, I mean I personally think that the mechanics has brought us here to division is not in its current form going to lead us to convergence so I think something has to change about the mechanics and if I think about one of these options right who is saying about the ideas that being the paper and you should really swap them out it's a very sophisticated mature idea right? Very sophisticated and mature to think that we can have our belief set down and then when they get challenged we can think about them and and swap them out for new ones that's not something that humans like to do it's hard I was recently in the Netherlands and the guy who is driving this van, we were going around shooting a TV series, guy was driving the van talking to me about electric cars and he was saying to me Derek you know that even if you get like a low emissions or zero emissions car and electric car, half of the emissions of any vehicle come from the production of the vehicle in the first place. So, really if you think you're cutting down a lot of the emissions of your vehicle by getting an electric car, which full disclosure, I do have, he's saying you're not really you know dramatically decreasing the emissions because still half the emissions happen when the car was made so a better strategy than buying all-electric cars would be to not buy any cars at all and just keep driving your car is a few years longer because that's going to save a lot more because you know a lot of the waste is upfront and I did not believe him. I was like that is crazy half of the emissions half, like I know it's hard to make a car but half of the emissions and you think it's gonna drive for you know hundreds and hundreds of thousands of kilometers and I went and I looked it up and it was true and I take his piece of paper and swap it in and I move mine out. But I think it's a really hard thing to do and it is something that like I felt repulsed by like I didn't want to swap my piece of paper out that's why I think I don't know that that can be the solution wholesale because we can't just say to everyone hang on a lot of you have beliefs that are not true can we just swap some paper out with you just say "NO THAT'S MY PAPER!" and so I was going to say to me the thing that needs to change I would say is some of the systems and particularly the algorithms. Because I think Facebook and I think they are looking at this now needs to figure out a way not to elevate take news but to let it languish and promote real news. They have a responsibility because they are curating the feeds of a billion people around the world they have the responsibility to make sure those feeds are not misleading and that is something that they were bad about doing in the last election. Yep. If you're determined to find the real news you go out on a marathon of research and usually you dig deeper and deeper past the sort of 'junk' that's being catered to us by the algorithms but what you're essentially proposing some sort of a lie detector to be implemented in algorithms that's kind of hard to do right unless it's manually altered but "uh oh" company's Facebook like I don't think you can manually alter the algorithm I I think you have to find a way and I think the algorithms can be made I think it's a big challenge i agree with you but I think there's a way to do it i mean if you look at Google search results there's constantly people trying to game what Google is doing but you don't end up with fake news sites at the top you don't end up with spam sites coming up top in the Google search results. That's because they battled and battled and battled to find these signals that that separate what's a valuable site what's a site that people appreciate and seems to be linked into a whole bunch of other sites which are all part of a factual web right and I think that similarly Facebook needs to do something like that we're in essence they look for signals of truth. I agree, very hard, and it's gonna be a constant battle, but I think you need to look for the signal of truth rather than just the signal of what pushes people's buttons. yeah, ... if yout look back at say the stone age if you had a weird opinion and you're in your little tribe either you convinced everyone or you change your mind. Right? So you know Facebook is kind of like our tribe right so some people use Facebook is more like oh these are my aquantences but a lot of people use it like these are my close friends if a close friend said something weird about up something on Facebook you comment, right? You have a discussion and you know you don't say no you're wrong I'm not going to talk to you anymore right because he's your friend or do you change your mind ou you convince the other person, right? But if you go on like Reddit you're not going to convince like 10 million billion people so yeah I don't know maybe like if you've ever liked tried the controversial tab on Reddit that's usually where some of the most of the interesting discussions are but yes sometimes it's not so important. And I think this brings me to one of my kind of points that i think is a little bit counter-intuitive and it's a point that's difficult for me to think about I I'm still not settled on this idea but I wonder sometimes that arguing just makes things worse you know as someone who makes science films I if I go out make a film about something that's controversial I don't know if maybe I'm just making it worse and so I i think we ought to think about that really carefully before we engage in discussions which is: Is there a chance by making these points which you think are really clear and really get at the truth is it possible that you were just causing the other side to be more deeply entrenched in their beliefs in the first place? Down here. Do you think that adapting to algorithms identify true statements can have some issues with like separating truth. Like uncontroversial statements from controversial than what's uncontroversial it will more likely seem true, yeah I get you there, as said, I don't know the solution I think it is hard but I do think we have to figure it out. I think that there are places on the web that have a good record of truth, Wikipedia for example, for all of its ability to be edited is still more likely than not to be true so I think there's all these places that do signal true things I think you know CNN is more likely to be true then Breitbart News, so I mean there has got to be some signal and the noise, some way to trace back references and things right some of the things we talked about were some of the things we talked about where manual intervention or or deeply searching right going back and looking at all these different sources that's something that most humans don't do and won't do and can't do don't have the time to do that's what I'm saying a machine can look at references, a machine can look at signals that spread you know and then they can do that very rapidly so you want to find out who are these people do they have a record of you know falsely are they actually accredited already in university there's there are a variety of things that you can do to see whether things have a true signal or not I don't think it's easy but I think it's possible. Yes. There are traditional news medias that may present the news or these articles fake or not to the public, don't you think they sort of had part of the blame because they fact checked those fake articles when the results already were in like all these statements were said and then when the results were in say in the last election they just want "Oh wait, these statements were they true? Oh wait they weren't but too late to alter the results from all statements yeah but I think there was a lot of light fact-checking but it didn't seem to do anything like people didn't seem to care about facts and that deep down is the the real question I want to get the answer to which is why don't people seem to care what's true and I guess maybe rather than putting it that way there were different camps which each had their own narratives and their own things that they believed was true and it was different from the other side and so figuring out what true was really hard especially if you were completely in one camp I mean there were there were fake things around on both yeah.