Title: Radiation vs Radioactive Atoms
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sehKAccM8p0

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Radiation has been in the news a lot Radiation has been in the news a lot Radiation has been in the news a lot lately, but the term radiation has just lately, but the term radiation has just lately, but the term radiation has just been thrown around loosely to mean been thrown around loosely to mean been thrown around loosely to mean anything potentially damaging coming anything potentially damaging coming anything potentially damaging coming away from a nuclear power plant. away from a nuclear power plant. away from a nuclear power plant. So, what are people worried about? So, what are people worried about? So, what are people worried about? That it's going to like explode and That it's going to like explode and That it's going to like explode and release radiation. release radiation. release radiation. But you don't know what's leaking or But you don't know what's leaking or But you don't know what's leaking or radiation. radiation. radiation. I don't think they actually know what I don't think they actually know what I don't think they actually know what they're worried about getting out of the they're worried about getting out of the they're worried about getting out of the reactor. So, I want to clear up this reactor. So, I want to clear up this reactor. So, I want to clear up this confusion between radiation on the one confusion between radiation on the one confusion between radiation on the one hand and the radioactive atoms that hand and the radioactive atoms that hand and the radioactive atoms that release it on the other. The radiation release it on the other. The radiation release it on the other. The radiation is the stuff, anything that radiates out is the stuff, anything that radiates out is the stuff, anything that radiates out from a nucleus. We call it nuclear from a nucleus. We call it nuclear from a nucleus. We call it nuclear radiation. Makes sense. And that's the radiation. Makes sense. And that's the radiation. Makes sense. And that's the stuff that can actually do damage to stuff that can actually do damage to stuff that can actually do damage to your molecules and cells. I have a your molecules and cells. I have a your molecules and cells. I have a source here which releases uh beta source here which releases uh beta source here which releases uh beta particles. And I have a geer counter particles. And I have a geer counter particles. And I have a geer counter which makes a click every time it it which makes a click every time it it which makes a click every time it it gets hit by a bit of radiation. gets hit by a bit of radiation. gets hit by a bit of radiation. So you can see that there is a lot of So you can see that there is a lot of So you can see that there is a lot of radiation coming from the source right radiation coming from the source right radiation coming from the source right now. It's actually not that much but you now. It's actually not that much but you now. It's actually not that much but you know it sounds like a lot. But what I know it sounds like a lot. But what I know it sounds like a lot. But what I want to point out is that as I move the want to point out is that as I move the want to point out is that as I move the Geiger counter away from the source Geiger counter away from the source Geiger counter away from the source the radiation very quickly falls off. the radiation very quickly falls off. the radiation very quickly falls off. A lot of this radiation can't really A lot of this radiation can't really A lot of this radiation can't really pass through air. pass through air. pass through air. What are we worried about like coming What are we worried about like coming What are we worried about like coming out of the plant? out of the plant? out of the plant? I guess the um probably the alpha I guess the um probably the alpha I guess the um probably the alpha particles really. particles really. particles really. But you're saying the alpha particles But you're saying the alpha particles But you're saying the alpha particles can't get that far? can't get that far? can't get that far? No, they can't. But No, they can't. But No, they can't. But so why are we worried about them? so why are we worried about them? so why are we worried about them? They're just going to like die when the They're just going to like die when the They're just going to like die when the beta particles. They can beta particles. They can beta particles. They can the alpha and beta radiation can be the alpha and beta radiation can be the alpha and beta radiation can be absorbed by next to nothing. Doesn't absorbed by next to nothing. Doesn't absorbed by next to nothing. Doesn't radiation drop off proportionately as it radiation drop off proportionately as it radiation drop off proportionately as it goes along? Like and and it's not a goes along? Like and and it's not a goes along? Like and and it's not a linear relationship, but it's more of a linear relationship, but it's more of a linear relationship, but it's more of a negative exponential relationship. So, negative exponential relationship. So, negative exponential relationship. So, if the radiation can't go very far, why if the radiation can't go very far, why if the radiation can't go very far, why are we worried about it? Well, the truth are we worried about it? Well, the truth are we worried about it? Well, the truth is we're not worried about the radiation is we're not worried about the radiation is we're not worried about the radiation itself. We're worried about the itself. We're worried about the itself. We're worried about the radioactive atoms that release it. So, radioactive atoms that release it. So, radioactive atoms that release it. So, we're worried about the stuff in here. we're worried about the stuff in here. we're worried about the stuff in here. In a nuclear power plant, there's a lot In a nuclear power plant, there's a lot In a nuclear power plant, there's a lot of radioactive atoms that can escape of radioactive atoms that can escape of radioactive atoms that can escape into the atmosphere, into the into the atmosphere, into the into the atmosphere, into the environment in the case of an explosion. environment in the case of an explosion. environment in the case of an explosion. And it is those radioactive atoms that And it is those radioactive atoms that And it is those radioactive atoms that we're concerned about. These radioactive we're concerned about. These radioactive we're concerned about. These radioactive atoms can be spread in the atmosphere atoms can be spread in the atmosphere atoms can be spread in the atmosphere over hundreds of kilometers. And they over hundreds of kilometers. And they over hundreds of kilometers. And they can effectively coat everything with a a can effectively coat everything with a a can effectively coat everything with a a blanket of this radioactive dust. Then blanket of this radioactive dust. Then blanket of this radioactive dust. Then you breathe it in or you eat it. And you breathe it in or you eat it. And you breathe it in or you eat it. And it's at that point when the radioactive it's at that point when the radioactive it's at that point when the radioactive atom is inside you that it releases its atom is inside you that it releases its atom is inside you that it releases its radiation in a damaging way because then radiation in a damaging way because then radiation in a damaging way because then the radiation is delivered directly to the radiation is delivered directly to the radiation is delivered directly to your cells and it can cause damage to your cells and it can cause damage to your cells and it can cause damage to your molecules and cells which can lead your molecules and cells which can lead your molecules and cells which can lead to uh to health problems later on. So to uh to health problems later on. So to uh to health problems later on. So it's not really radiation that we're it's not really radiation that we're it's not really radiation that we're worried about directly seeping out worried about directly seeping out worried about directly seeping out through the walls of nuclear power through the walls of nuclear power through the walls of nuclear power plants. It's the radioactive material, plants. It's the radioactive material, plants. It's the radioactive material, the radioactive atoms inside that we're the radioactive atoms inside that we're the radioactive atoms inside that we're worried about escaping um and then doing worried about escaping um and then doing worried about escaping um and then doing damage once they have reached us.