Title: Slinky Drop
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wGIZKETKKdw

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Today I'm at the University of Sydney Today I'm at the University of Sydney Today I'm at the University of Sydney talking to Rod Cross who's uh done talking to Rod Cross who's uh done talking to Rod Cross who's uh done physics for many many decades. physics for many many decades. physics for many many decades. Uh you are perfectly correct. I was a Uh you are perfectly correct. I was a Uh you are perfectly correct. I was a student here in 1960. student here in 1960. student here in 1960. Wow. So he certainly knows a lot about Wow. So he certainly knows a lot about Wow. So he certainly knows a lot about physics. And today we're doing an physics. And today we're doing an physics. And today we're doing an experiment involving a slinky. Can you experiment involving a slinky. Can you experiment involving a slinky. Can you tell me about it? tell me about it? tell me about it? Uh well I have here a slinky in my hand. Uh well I have here a slinky in my hand. Uh well I have here a slinky in my hand. I'm going to hold the slinky by the top I'm going to hold the slinky by the top I'm going to hold the slinky by the top end. Let the bottom end go so the slinky end. Let the bottom end go so the slinky end. Let the bottom end go so the slinky stretches stretches stretches and it dangles freely. And I'm going to and it dangles freely. And I'm going to and it dangles freely. And I'm going to ask the question, what happens when I ask the question, what happens when I ask the question, what happens when I let go at the top end? Will the bottom let go at the top end? Will the bottom let go at the top end? Will the bottom end fall first? Will the top end fall end fall first? Will the top end fall end fall first? Will the top end fall first? first? first? Will both ends fall together? Or will Will both ends fall together? Or will Will both ends fall together? Or will the center of the slinky stay at rest the center of the slinky stay at rest the center of the slinky stay at rest and the top end and the bottom end and the top end and the bottom end and the top end and the bottom end approach each other and they collapse in approach each other and they collapse in approach each other and they collapse in the middle? Make your prediction and the middle? Make your prediction and the middle? Make your prediction and then I'll drop it. Ready, set, go. then I'll drop it. Ready, set, go. then I'll drop it. Ready, set, go. [laughter] Did you see it?