Title: Slinky Drop Answer
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCMmmEEyOO0

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en But this is going to be really tough to But this is going to be really tough to But this is going to be really tough to see. So, how are we going to actually see. So, how are we going to actually see. So, how are we going to actually determine what the right answer is? determine what the right answer is? determine what the right answer is? Uh, Uh, Uh, if I were to drop it now, it would if I were to drop it now, it would if I were to drop it now, it would happen so fast you wouldn't really see happen so fast you wouldn't really see happen so fast you wouldn't really see clearly what's happening. So, I've clearly what's happening. So, I've clearly what's happening. So, I've brought along my slow motion camera and brought along my slow motion camera and brought along my slow motion camera and you'll see it at 300 frames pers and you'll see it at 300 frames pers and you'll see it at 300 frames pers and it's quite spectacular. it's quite spectacular. it's quite spectacular. Well, that's ultra slow-mo. So, that's Well, that's ultra slow-mo. So, that's Well, that's ultra slow-mo. So, that's exactly what we need to sort out this exactly what we need to sort out this exactly what we need to sort out this problem. problem. problem. We'll give a a countdown cuz it happens We'll give a a countdown cuz it happens We'll give a a countdown cuz it happens really fast. really fast. really fast. All right. Three, two, one, drop. All right. Three, two, one, drop. All right. Three, two, one, drop. Wow. Did you see that? Wow. Did you see that? Wow. Did you see that? I I I I didn't really see which happened I I I I didn't really see which happened I I I I didn't really see which happened first. No, I needed need to slow that first. No, I needed need to slow that first. No, I needed need to slow that down. down. down. Well, let's go to a slow motion replay Well, let's go to a slow motion replay Well, let's go to a slow motion replay and see what actually happened. and see what actually happened. and see what actually happened. [Music] [Music] So from the slow motion camera, we can So from the slow motion camera, we can So from the slow motion camera, we can clearly see that the bottom end stayed clearly see that the bottom end stayed clearly see that the bottom end stayed completely stationary even after you you completely stationary even after you you completely stationary even after you you let go of the top. It waited until the let go of the top. It waited until the let go of the top. It waited until the whole slinky had collapsed down to the whole slinky had collapsed down to the whole slinky had collapsed down to the bottom before it itself moved downwards. bottom before it itself moved downwards. bottom before it itself moved downwards. How do we explain that? Well, there are How do we explain that? Well, there are How do we explain that? Well, there are a number of explanations, but the a number of explanations, but the a number of explanations, but the simplest explanation is that the bottom simplest explanation is that the bottom simplest explanation is that the bottom end is sitting there minding its own end is sitting there minding its own end is sitting there minding its own business with gravity pulling it down business with gravity pulling it down business with gravity pulling it down and tension pulling it up. Equal and and tension pulling it up. Equal and and tension pulling it up. Equal and opposite forces, no motion at the bottom opposite forces, no motion at the bottom opposite forces, no motion at the bottom end until end until end until the bottom end gets the information that the bottom end gets the information that the bottom end gets the information that the tension has changed. And it takes the tension has changed. And it takes the tension has changed. And it takes time for that information to propagate time for that information to propagate time for that information to propagate down through the slinky to reach the down through the slinky to reach the down through the slinky to reach the bottom end. So, it's propagating down as bottom end. So, it's propagating down as bottom end. So, it's propagating down as a compressional wave. And we saw that a compressional wave. And we saw that a compressional wave. And we saw that compression wave travel down and it has compression wave travel down and it has compression wave travel down and it has to reach the bottom before the bottom to reach the bottom before the bottom to reach the bottom before the bottom even knows that you've let go at the even knows that you've let go at the even knows that you've let go at the top. top. top. Correct. Correct. Correct. And that's when it knows to start And that's when it knows to start And that's when it knows to start falling. falling. falling. Correct. Correct. Correct. That's a really remarkable finding. I That's a really remarkable finding. I That's a really remarkable finding. I mean, does this apply to any other mean, does this apply to any other mean, does this apply to any other objects or is it just slinkies? objects or is it just slinkies? objects or is it just slinkies? Uh, no. It applies uh to the real world Uh, no. It applies uh to the real world Uh, no. It applies uh to the real world uh particularly in sports, which is the uh particularly in sports, which is the uh particularly in sports, which is the field I'm interested in. For example, field I'm interested in. For example, field I'm interested in. For example, when a player hits a ball, there's a when a player hits a ball, there's a when a player hits a ball, there's a huge force at the business end, but that huge force at the business end, but that huge force at the business end, but that force is not felt at the handle end force is not felt at the handle end force is not felt at the handle end until the the ball is well on its way. until the the ball is well on its way. until the the ball is well on its way. So that a wave has to propagate from the So that a wave has to propagate from the So that a wave has to propagate from the business end down to the handle end and business end down to the handle end and business end down to the handle end and then it propagates back again. And what then it propagates back again. And what then it propagates back again. And what you actually feel down this end is you actually feel down this end is you actually feel down this end is considerably less than what the ball considerably less than what the ball considerably less than what the ball felt. felt. felt. So wow. If you're playing tennis or So wow. If you're playing tennis or So wow. If you're playing tennis or something, you only feel that you've hit something, you only feel that you've hit something, you only feel that you've hit the ball after you've actually hit the the ball after you've actually hit the the ball after you've actually hit the ball. ball. ball. Yeah, the ball's nearly to the net by Yeah, the ball's nearly to the net by Yeah, the ball's nearly to the net by the time you actually feel what's the time you actually feel what's the time you actually feel what's happened. happened. happened. That goes against, you know, all your That goes against, you know, all your That goes against, you know, all your intuitions that you really can feel it intuitions that you really can feel it intuitions that you really can feel it as soon as the ball's on your on your as soon as the ball's on your on your as soon as the ball's on your on your racket. racket. racket. Uh it's the same in golf. If you whack a Uh it's the same in golf. If you whack a Uh it's the same in golf. If you whack a golf ball, you often find golfers will golf ball, you often find golfers will golf ball, you often find golfers will finish with a a nice flourish thinking finish with a a nice flourish thinking finish with a a nice flourish thinking that it has some effect on the ball, but that it has some effect on the ball, but that it has some effect on the ball, but of course the ball was halfway to the of course the ball was halfway to the of course the ball was halfway to the hole by the time that happens. hole by the time that happens. hole by the time that happens. Of course. Now, what if we wanted to do Of course. Now, what if we wanted to do Of course. Now, what if we wanted to do a little extension activity? I want you a little extension activity? I want you a little extension activity? I want you to make a prediction. If we attach this to make a prediction. If we attach this to make a prediction. If we attach this tennis ball onto the base of the slinky tennis ball onto the base of the slinky tennis ball onto the base of the slinky and we uh drop it again, what will and we uh drop it again, what will and we uh drop it again, what will happen to the tennis ball? Will it do happen to the tennis ball? Will it do happen to the tennis ball? Will it do the same as the base of the slinky and the same as the base of the slinky and the same as the base of the slinky and just stay there? Or will it fall with just stay there? Or will it fall with just stay there? Or will it fall with the acceleration due to gravity uh g or the acceleration due to gravity uh g or the acceleration due to gravity uh g or will it go upwards? will it go upwards? will it go upwards? Well, I have to try it and find out. Well, I have to try it and find out. Well, I have to try it and find out. All right, I'd like you to make your All right, I'd like you to make your All right, I'd like you to make your prediction now. Quick.