Title: Sound + Fire = Rubens' Tube
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ZcOusmB4Ls

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, Dr. Phil, uh, what's going on here? So, Dr. Phil, uh, what's going on here? So, Dr. Phil, uh, what's going on here? Okay, what we've got here is a metal Okay, what we've got here is a metal Okay, what we've got here is a metal pipe with a whole lot of holes in it. pipe with a whole lot of holes in it. pipe with a whole lot of holes in it. We're pumping gas through it, and we've We're pumping gas through it, and we've We're pumping gas through it, and we've lit it up, as you can see. So, we have lit it up, as you can see. So, we have lit it up, as you can see. So, we have like a whole lot of, uh, Bunson burners like a whole lot of, uh, Bunson burners like a whole lot of, uh, Bunson burners all in a row. all in a row. all in a row. Whole bunch of little flames burning Whole bunch of little flames burning Whole bunch of little flames burning gas. And, um, this is all very pretty, gas. And, um, this is all very pretty, gas. And, um, this is all very pretty, but what does it have to do with but what does it have to do with but what does it have to do with science? science? science? Just you wait. Just you wait. Just you wait. I've got a speaker on the end here. I've got a speaker on the end here. I've got a speaker on the end here. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. So, there you go. So, there you go. So, there you go. You're pumping a sound through the pipe You're pumping a sound through the pipe You're pumping a sound through the pipe now. Is that right? now. Is that right? now. Is that right? That's right. That's right. That's right. It's quite an annoying sound, Phil. It's quite an annoying sound, Phil. It's quite an annoying sound, Phil. Let me change it. Let me change it. Let me change it. [Music] Okay. A few changes happening. Okay. A few changes happening. Okay. A few changes happening. Yeah. So, there's these areas where the Yeah. So, there's these areas where the Yeah. So, there's these areas where the flame is higher and other areas where flame is higher and other areas where flame is higher and other areas where the flame is not as high. What's causing the flame is not as high. What's causing the flame is not as high. What's causing that? that? that? Well, it kind of looks like a wave, Well, it kind of looks like a wave, Well, it kind of looks like a wave, doesn't it? doesn't it? doesn't it? Yeah, it definitely does look like a Yeah, it definitely does look like a Yeah, it definitely does look like a wave. But I mean, what is it showing us? wave. But I mean, what is it showing us? wave. But I mean, what is it showing us? Why is it got these high points and low Why is it got these high points and low Why is it got these high points and low points? points? points? Well, sound is a wave. When I speak, my Well, sound is a wave. When I speak, my Well, sound is a wave. When I speak, my vocal cords vibrate air which sends a vocal cords vibrate air which sends a vocal cords vibrate air which sends a wave to your eardrum, vibrates your wave to your eardrum, vibrates your wave to your eardrum, vibrates your eardrum, and that's how you detect eardrum, and that's how you detect eardrum, and that's how you detect sound. sound. sound. Okay. So, how is this sound wave Okay. So, how is this sound wave Okay. So, how is this sound wave changing the height of these flames? changing the height of these flames? changing the height of these flames? Well, the wave is actually areas of high Well, the wave is actually areas of high Well, the wave is actually areas of high pressure and low pressure in air. So pressure and low pressure in air. So pressure and low pressure in air. So there's actually a sort of compression there's actually a sort of compression there's actually a sort of compression traveling through and that's what we can traveling through and that's what we can traveling through and that's what we can see is the compression in the pipe here. see is the compression in the pipe here. see is the compression in the pipe here. There's area where there's high There's area where there's high There's area where there's high pressure, areas where there's low pressure, areas where there's low pressure, areas where there's low pressure pressure pressure and that results the higher pressure is and that results the higher pressure is and that results the higher pressure is obviously pushing the gas out uh faster obviously pushing the gas out uh faster obviously pushing the gas out uh faster and so we're getting these higher and so we're getting these higher and so we're getting these higher flames. flames. flames. That's right in a simplistic way. Pretty That's right in a simplistic way. Pretty That's right in a simplistic way. Pretty complex situation, but what about if we complex situation, but what about if we complex situation, but what about if we change it? change it? change it? So you made it a higher pitch now. So you made it a higher pitch now. So you made it a higher pitch now. And I noticed that these peaks are sort And I noticed that these peaks are sort And I noticed that these peaks are sort of getting closer together. of getting closer together. of getting closer together. That's right. Yeah. So, we've actually That's right. Yeah. So, we've actually That's right. Yeah. So, we've actually changed the wave by having a different changed the wave by having a different changed the wave by having a different frequency. We've made a shorter frequency. We've made a shorter frequency. We've made a shorter wavelength. wavelength. wavelength. We've changed the sound wave. We've changed the sound wave. We've changed the sound wave. Changed the sound wave. Changed the sound wave. Changed the sound wave. We've made a higher pitch. So, that's a We've made a higher pitch. So, that's a We've made a higher pitch. So, that's a higher frequency. higher frequency. higher frequency. Yep. It's vibrating faster. And to get Yep. It's vibrating faster. And to get Yep. It's vibrating faster. And to get all those vibrations in, it has to do it all those vibrations in, it has to do it all those vibrations in, it has to do it in a shorter space. in a shorter space. in a shorter space. In a shorter wavelength. Very In a shorter wavelength. Very In a shorter wavelength. Very shorter wavelength. shorter wavelength. shorter wavelength. Okay. But, uh, this is all very Okay. But, uh, this is all very Okay. But, uh, this is all very interesting, but you know, it's killing interesting, but you know, it's killing interesting, but you know, it's killing my ears. So, what are we going to do? my ears. So, what are we going to do? my ears. So, what are we going to do? Let's go for something a bit more Let's go for something a bit more Let's go for something a bit more musical, shall we? musical, shall we? musical, shall we? All right. Let's try a fairly simple All right. Let's try a fairly simple All right. Let's try a fairly simple tone. So, I'll just whistle. [Music] [Music] [Music] So, that's uh not bad. Let's have a So, that's uh not bad. Let's have a So, that's uh not bad. Let's have a let's have a listen to someone singing. let's have a listen to someone singing. let's have a listen to someone singing. You know anyone who can sing a bit? You know anyone who can sing a bit? You know anyone who can sing a bit? I I don't know anyone who can really I I don't know anyone who can really I I don't know anyone who can really sing. Oh, jeez. All right. It's just sing. Oh, jeez. All right. It's just sing. Oh, jeez. All right. It's just chem a and me are made of these at times. and me are made of these at times. and me are made of these at times. Hey, do you know any Mozart? Hey, do you know any Mozart? Hey, do you know any Mozart? I don't. I don't. I don't. I'm sure I'm sure you know a bit of I'm sure I'm sure you know a bit of I'm sure I'm sure you know a bit of Mozart. Maybe you heard it in the womb. Mozart. Maybe you heard it in the womb. Mozart. Maybe you heard it in the womb. Here go. Have a have a try of this. Here go. Have a have a try of this. Here go. Have a have a try of this. I'll just warm the orchestra up. I'll just warm the orchestra up. I'll just warm the orchestra up. Ready, you guys? Thank you. [Music] [Music] [Music] [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] My mother. [Music] [Music] [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Music] Very good. Very good. Very good. [Music]