Title: Spinning Tube Trick Explained
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rAiZR_zasg

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] [Music] So, how does the spinning tube trick So, how does the spinning tube trick So, how does the spinning tube trick work? Well, a lot of you identified that work? Well, a lot of you identified that work? Well, a lot of you identified that the tube is rotating about its long axis the tube is rotating about its long axis the tube is rotating about its long axis and it's also rotating horizontally and it's also rotating horizontally and it's also rotating horizontally about its middle. But how does that about its middle. But how does that about its middle. But how does that allow us to see one symbol and not the allow us to see one symbol and not the allow us to see one symbol and not the other? Well, let's say we press on the other? Well, let's say we press on the other? Well, let's say we press on the X. If you press down on the X, it'll X. If you press down on the X, it'll X. If you press down on the X, it'll actually be spinning backwards with actually be spinning backwards with actually be spinning backwards with respect to the motion of the tube in its respect to the motion of the tube in its respect to the motion of the tube in its horizontal rotation. horizontal rotation. horizontal rotation. So when the X turns to face upwards, it So when the X turns to face upwards, it So when the X turns to face upwards, it will actually be spinning backwards with will actually be spinning backwards with will actually be spinning backwards with the tube while the tube is moving the tube while the tube is moving the tube while the tube is moving forwards. So the velocity of the X will forwards. So the velocity of the X will forwards. So the velocity of the X will be reduced by its spin in the backwards be reduced by its spin in the backwards be reduced by its spin in the backwards direction. On the other hand, the O is direction. On the other hand, the O is direction. On the other hand, the O is spinning in the same direction as the spinning in the same direction as the spinning in the same direction as the tube is moving, which means that the O tube is moving, which means that the O tube is moving, which means that the O will move across your field of view much will move across your field of view much will move across your field of view much faster and therefore it'll be much more faster and therefore it'll be much more faster and therefore it'll be much more difficult to see. I want to say a big difficult to see. I want to say a big difficult to see. I want to say a big thank you for all of those who submitted thank you for all of those who submitted thank you for all of those who submitted a video response. I really, really a video response. I really, really a video response. I really, really enjoyed watching your work. Baby. enjoyed watching your work. Baby. enjoyed watching your work. Baby. [Music] [Music] [Music] Okay. Okay. Okay. Right on the center of gravity. Right on the center of gravity. Right on the center of gravity. And so I had to rethink that. And so I had to rethink that. And so I had to rethink that. That's smart. He's got a smoother That's smart. He's got a smoother That's smart. He's got a smoother surface there. surface there. surface there. I like that. I like that. I like that. Oh, Oh, Oh, this is my favorite part. this is my favorite part. this is my favorite part. Spin that way in both direction. Spin that way in both direction. Spin that way in both direction. All right. It would spin the O spin back All right. It would spin the O spin back All right. It would spin the O spin back towards me. towards me. towards me. So the side touching the ground travels So the side touching the ground travels So the side touching the ground travels less distance than the part not touching less distance than the part not touching less distance than the part not touching the ground, causing it to spin slightly the ground, causing it to spin slightly the ground, causing it to spin slightly slower. The outer part takes longer to slower. The outer part takes longer to slower. The outer part takes longer to do. 72 hours. do. 72 hours. do. 72 hours. And my dad as you can with Bruce. And my dad as you can with Bruce. And my dad as you can with Bruce. That's amazing. That's amazing. That's amazing. And here's our tools. And here's our tools. And here's our tools. There's dedication. There's dedication. There's dedication. I would also like to thank everyone who I would also like to thank everyone who I would also like to thank everyone who posted in the comments their posted in the comments their posted in the comments their suggestions. I think Grumble 45 was the suggestions. I think Grumble 45 was the suggestions. I think Grumble 45 was the first one to post a correct solution. first one to post a correct solution. first one to post a correct solution. So, uh, well done to you. And this just So, uh, well done to you. And this just So, uh, well done to you. And this just shows me that we need some more shows me that we need some more shows me that we need some more complicated physics puzzles for you guys complicated physics puzzles for you guys complicated physics puzzles for you guys to try to solve. So, I'll see what I can to try to solve. So, I'll see what I can to try to solve. So, I'll see what I can do and I'll post one up shortly. Until do and I'll post one up shortly. Until do and I'll post one up shortly. Until then, keep spinning those tubes. [Music]