Title: Spinning Disk Trick Solution
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tDr26U49_VA

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So in the spinning disc trick, we saw So in the spinning disc trick, we saw So in the spinning disc trick, we saw that an asymmetrically weighted disc that an asymmetrically weighted disc that an asymmetrically weighted disc when spun actually flips so that the when spun actually flips so that the when spun actually flips so that the lighter side goes towards the bottom. lighter side goes towards the bottom. lighter side goes towards the bottom. Now this is a variation on something Now this is a variation on something Now this is a variation on something called the tippy top. A little spinning called the tippy top. A little spinning called the tippy top. A little spinning toy that spins upside down so that its toy that spins upside down so that its toy that spins upside down so that its heavy side actually lifts up. Now this heavy side actually lifts up. Now this heavy side actually lifts up. Now this toy was played with by far more toy was played with by far more toy was played with by far more accomplished physicists than me, people accomplished physicists than me, people accomplished physicists than me, people like Neils Boore and Wolf Gang Pie. So, like Neils Boore and Wolf Gang Pie. So, like Neils Boore and Wolf Gang Pie. So, I have a little confession to make that I have a little confession to make that I have a little confession to make that when I made this spinning disc trick when I made this spinning disc trick when I made this spinning disc trick video, I didn't actually know how it video, I didn't actually know how it video, I didn't actually know how it worked. So, when I said I don't want to worked. So, when I said I don't want to worked. So, when I said I don't want to give you the answer right away, what I give you the answer right away, what I give you the answer right away, what I actually meant was, "Can you guys help actually meant was, "Can you guys help actually meant was, "Can you guys help me out and figure out how this works?" me out and figure out how this works?" me out and figure out how this works?" Now, in the comments, there were 25 Now, in the comments, there were 25 Now, in the comments, there were 25 comments pertaining to centrial force comments pertaining to centrial force comments pertaining to centrial force and 56 comments related to centrifugal and 56 comments related to centrifugal and 56 comments related to centrifugal force. So, clearly, I need to do a video force. So, clearly, I need to do a video force. So, clearly, I need to do a video about those things. I think most of the about those things. I think most of the about those things. I think most of the time you guys were thinking an time you guys were thinking an time you guys were thinking an explanation like this. explanation like this. explanation like this. Rotational systems tend so that their Rotational systems tend so that their Rotational systems tend so that their moment of inertia increases. So I'm moment of inertia increases. So I'm moment of inertia increases. So I'm thinking that as this starts spinning thinking that as this starts spinning thinking that as this starts spinning like this and is uh wobbling around. You like this and is uh wobbling around. You like this and is uh wobbling around. You think about there's a difference moment think about there's a difference moment think about there's a difference moment of inertia of this thing spinning around of inertia of this thing spinning around of inertia of this thing spinning around compared to at the bottom where there's compared to at the bottom where there's compared to at the bottom where there's more of the meat more of the meat more of the meat at the top up the top. And intuition is at the top up the top. And intuition is at the top up the top. And intuition is that takes effort for the ice skater to that takes effort for the ice skater to that takes effort for the ice skater to bring her arms in. Whereas just relaxing bring her arms in. Whereas just relaxing bring her arms in. Whereas just relaxing it tends to increase moment of inertia. it tends to increase moment of inertia. it tends to increase moment of inertia. Tribal force pushes it out. Tribal force pushes it out. Tribal force pushes it out. Now an additional 52 comments mentioned Now an additional 52 comments mentioned Now an additional 52 comments mentioned inertia betting that that's my answer inertia betting that that's my answer inertia betting that that's my answer for everything. Unfortunately, I don't for everything. Unfortunately, I don't for everything. Unfortunately, I don't think any of these things explains think any of these things explains think any of these things explains really what's going on with the spinning really what's going on with the spinning really what's going on with the spinning disc. And so I had to set out and do my disc. And so I had to set out and do my disc. And so I had to set out and do my own investigations. So the first thing I own investigations. So the first thing I own investigations. So the first thing I did was I talked to the smartest did was I talked to the smartest did was I talked to the smartest physicists I know. What do you think physicists I know. What do you think physicists I know. What do you think it's going to do if I if I rotate? it's going to do if I if I rotate? it's going to do if I if I rotate? It's going to spin around and it's going It's going to spin around and it's going It's going to spin around and it's going to turn upside down. So, the mass is up to turn upside down. So, the mass is up to turn upside down. So, the mass is up the top. I know. I bug it if I know why. the top. I know. I bug it if I know why. the top. I know. I bug it if I know why. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] I filmed the disc in 100 frames per I filmed the disc in 100 frames per I filmed the disc in 100 frames per second and 300 frames per second slow second and 300 frames per second slow second and 300 frames per second slow motion. And we labeled some points along motion. And we labeled some points along motion. And we labeled some points along the disc so we could really see what was the disc so we could really see what was the disc so we could really see what was happening. But even then, it was tricky happening. But even then, it was tricky happening. But even then, it was tricky to figure out. I took it out to the ice to figure out. I took it out to the ice to figure out. I took it out to the ice rink to see what role the surface played rink to see what role the surface played rink to see what role the surface played in terms of the spinning disc. So, what in terms of the spinning disc. So, what in terms of the spinning disc. So, what is my final explanation? it is that when is my final explanation? it is that when is my final explanation? it is that when the disc is spinning, the first thing we the disc is spinning, the first thing we the disc is spinning, the first thing we should notice is that the angular should notice is that the angular should notice is that the angular momentum remains constant the whole momentum remains constant the whole momentum remains constant the whole time. So when I spin it clockwise from time. So when I spin it clockwise from time. So when I spin it clockwise from above, the angular momentum is pointing above, the angular momentum is pointing above, the angular momentum is pointing vertically downwards. And that remains vertically downwards. And that remains vertically downwards. And that remains the same even as the disc flips over. So the same even as the disc flips over. So the same even as the disc flips over. So what is causing the disc to flip? Well, what is causing the disc to flip? Well, what is causing the disc to flip? Well, if the disc wobbles a little bit, it's if the disc wobbles a little bit, it's if the disc wobbles a little bit, it's off center. So its center of mass about off center. So its center of mass about off center. So its center of mass about which it's spinning is not located which it's spinning is not located which it's spinning is not located directly above the point of contact with directly above the point of contact with directly above the point of contact with the surface. And so as the disc spins the surface. And so as the disc spins the surface. And so as the disc spins there's some sliding friction which acts there's some sliding friction which acts there's some sliding friction which acts to create a torque on the disc. Now that to create a torque on the disc. Now that to create a torque on the disc. Now that torque reduces the angular momentum in torque reduces the angular momentum in torque reduces the angular momentum in the three direction of the disc and the three direction of the disc and the three direction of the disc and increases it in the one two direction of increases it in the one two direction of increases it in the one two direction of the disc which causes the disc to turn the disc which causes the disc to turn the disc which causes the disc to turn over like this. And once the disc goes over like this. And once the disc goes over like this. And once the disc goes past that point, the frictional torque past that point, the frictional torque past that point, the frictional torque at the bottom continues to rotate the at the bottom continues to rotate the at the bottom continues to rotate the disc until it is vertical like that. disc until it is vertical like that. disc until it is vertical like that. So it's really friction that is So it's really friction that is So it's really friction that is responsible for flipping this disc over. responsible for flipping this disc over. responsible for flipping this disc over. So the heavy part goes up. Now, there So the heavy part goes up. Now, there So the heavy part goes up. Now, there was an excellent video response made by was an excellent video response made by was an excellent video response made by Zog from Beetlejuice, so you should Zog from Beetlejuice, so you should Zog from Beetlejuice, so you should definitely check that out. Why don't I definitely check that out. Why don't I definitely check that out. Why don't I have any hair in that? Anyway, it is an have any hair in that? Anyway, it is an have any hair in that? Anyway, it is an amazing and hilarious response which is amazing and hilarious response which is amazing and hilarious response which is actually very physically accurate. So, actually very physically accurate. So, actually very physically accurate. So, check it out when you get a chance. Now, check it out when you get a chance. Now, check it out when you get a chance. Now, I have my doubts that this explanation I have my doubts that this explanation I have my doubts that this explanation is really the whole answer because I is really the whole answer because I is really the whole answer because I noticed that if I spin it above the noticed that if I spin it above the noticed that if I spin it above the ground, the hole still seems to go ground, the hole still seems to go ground, the hole still seems to go towards the bottom. That's kind of odd. towards the bottom. That's kind of odd. towards the bottom. That's kind of odd. And when I took it to the ice rink, And when I took it to the ice rink, And when I took it to the ice rink, well, sometimes the disc would behave as well, sometimes the disc would behave as well, sometimes the disc would behave as expected. And sometimes it just did expected. And sometimes it just did expected. And sometimes it just did strange things where the hole would go strange things where the hole would go strange things where the hole would go down and then up and then down and then down and then up and then down and then down and then up and then down and then up. I think maybe it's a sign of up. I think maybe it's a sign of up. I think maybe it's a sign of procession or perhaps mutation, but procession or perhaps mutation, but procession or perhaps mutation, but those are things for another video. So those are things for another video. So those are things for another video. So until next time, keep spinning those until next time, keep spinning those until next time, keep spinning those discs.