Title: Spool Trick
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bwf3msm7rqM

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Today I'm doing a two-part experiment Today I'm doing a two-part experiment Today I'm doing a two-part experiment involving a spool. I've wrapped some involving a spool. I've wrapped some involving a spool. I've wrapped some nylon rope around the spool and right nylon rope around the spool and right nylon rope around the spool and right now it's coming over the top as you can now it's coming over the top as you can now it's coming over the top as you can see. I'm going to place the spool down see. I'm going to place the spool down see. I'm going to place the spool down beside me and I'm going to pull the rope beside me and I'm going to pull the rope beside me and I'm going to pull the rope horizontally towards me. And I want you horizontally towards me. And I want you horizontally towards me. And I want you to make a prediction. What's going to to make a prediction. What's going to to make a prediction. What's going to happen when I pull the rope? Will it happen when I pull the rope? Will it happen when I pull the rope? Will it move to the right or to the left? Or move to the right or to the left? Or move to the right or to the left? Or does it depend on how I pull the rope? does it depend on how I pull the rope? does it depend on how I pull the rope? It'll go this way. It'll go this way. It'll go this way. It'll go to the left. It'll go to the left. It'll go to the left. I don't know why, but it will. I don't know why, but it will. I don't know why, but it will. I think it'll go to the right. I think it'll go to the right. I think it'll go to the right. Depends on how you pull it. Depends on how you pull it. Depends on how you pull it. What do you What do you What do you What do you What do you What do you What do you What do you What do you reckon? reckon? reckon? If it's loose If it's loose If it's loose Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's just going to spin around on the It's just going to spin around on the It's just going to spin around on the on the blue bit. But if you if it's on the blue bit. But if you if it's on the blue bit. But if you if it's tight, it's it's going to come toward tight, it's it's going to come toward tight, it's it's going to come toward No, it's going to stay where it is No, it's going to stay where it is No, it's going to stay where it is because it's going to unwind. because it's going to unwind. because it's going to unwind. I'd like you to make your prediction now I'd like you to make your prediction now I'd like you to make your prediction now by clicking on one of the annotations. by clicking on one of the annotations. by clicking on one of the annotations. Now, I should point out that this is Now, I should point out that this is Now, I should point out that this is only the first part of the experiment, only the first part of the experiment, only the first part of the experiment, so try not to overthink it. If you're on so try not to overthink it. If you're on so try not to overthink it. If you're on a mobile device, you can find the links a mobile device, you can find the links a mobile device, you can find the links in the description below. All right, are in the description below. All right, are in the description below. All right, are you ready? Three, two, one.