Title: States of Matter
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KCL8zqjXbME

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, I wanted to talk to people about the So, I wanted to talk to people about the So, I wanted to talk to people about the different states of matter, solid, different states of matter, solid, different states of matter, solid, liquid, and gas, using water as an liquid, and gas, using water as an liquid, and gas, using water as an example. But I thought first I better be example. But I thought first I better be example. But I thought first I better be sure that we're all on the same page sure that we're all on the same page sure that we're all on the same page about what water is made of. What's about what water is made of. What's about what water is made of. What's water made of? water made of? water made of? Water. Water. Water. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What makes water? What makes water? What makes water? Um, water. Um, water. Um, water. Okay. What elements does it take to make Okay. What elements does it take to make Okay. What elements does it take to make water? water? water? H2O. H2O. H2O. So, what does that mean? So, what does that mean? So, what does that mean? It is water. It is water. It is water. What elements? Water and cold. Water What elements? Water and cold. Water What elements? Water and cold. Water plus cold. But what does the H and the O plus cold. But what does the H and the O plus cold. But what does the H and the O mean? mean? mean? Uh um something and oxygen. Uh um something and oxygen. Uh um something and oxygen. Something and oxygen. Something and oxygen. Something and oxygen. Hydrogen. Hydrogen. Hydrogen. There you go. There you go. There you go. Hydrogen. Hydrogen. Hydrogen. Hydrogen and oxygen. What's the two Hydrogen and oxygen. What's the two Hydrogen and oxygen. What's the two mean? mean? mean? Hydrogen. Oxygen. Hydrogen. Oxygen. Hydrogen. Oxygen. And the two H2O. And the two H2O. And the two H2O. Why do we say two? Why do we say two? Why do we say two? Uh I don't know. Uh I don't know. Uh I don't know. It's two particles of hydrogen and one It's two particles of hydrogen and one It's two particles of hydrogen and one of oxygen. of oxygen. of oxygen. There you go. So that that makes what we There you go. So that that makes what we There you go. So that that makes what we call a water compound. compound. compound. Two two atoms of hydrogen and one atom Two two atoms of hydrogen and one atom Two two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen makes a water of oxygen makes a water of oxygen makes a water molecule. molecule. molecule. I know the word was like on the tip of I know the word was like on the tip of I know the word was like on the tip of your tongue. your tongue. your tongue. I guess we got there in the end. So I guess we got there in the end. So I guess we got there in the end. So what's the difference between solid and what's the difference between solid and what's the difference between solid and liquid water? liquid water? liquid water? Uh so the obviously the temperature of Uh so the obviously the temperature of Uh so the obviously the temperature of it it it it's a lot colder. Um it's a lot colder. Um it's a lot colder. Um ice is frozen. What does it mean to be ice is frozen. What does it mean to be ice is frozen. What does it mean to be frozen then? frozen then? frozen then? Colds. Colds. Colds. Liquid water is no good for skating on. Liquid water is no good for skating on. Liquid water is no good for skating on. Ice is great. Ice is great. Ice is great. Nothing other than temperature. Nothing other than temperature. Nothing other than temperature. So, everyone recognizes that temperature So, everyone recognizes that temperature So, everyone recognizes that temperature is important in determining whether the is important in determining whether the is important in determining whether the water is ice or liquid. But what's water is ice or liquid. But what's water is ice or liquid. But what's actually happening between the water actually happening between the water actually happening between the water molecules? What's the difference between molecules? What's the difference between molecules? What's the difference between water and ice? water and ice? water and ice? It's frozen. It's frozen. It's frozen. What does it mean for something to be What does it mean for something to be What does it mean for something to be frozen? frozen? frozen? It's solid. It's solid. It's solid. What does it mean for something to be What does it mean for something to be What does it mean for something to be solid? solid? solid? That it's like a brick. That it's like a brick. That it's like a brick. It's like a brick. And what makes it It's like a brick. And what makes it It's like a brick. And what makes it like a brick? What's happening in there? like a brick? What's happening in there? like a brick? What's happening in there? I don't know. But what makes it a solid I don't know. But what makes it a solid I don't know. But what makes it a solid versus a liquid? versus a liquid? versus a liquid? Well, in this case, lots of pipes going Well, in this case, lots of pipes going Well, in this case, lots of pipes going underneath. But underneath. But underneath. But that makes it very cold. that makes it very cold. that makes it very cold. Makes it very very cold. Yeah. Makes it very very cold. Yeah. Makes it very very cold. Yeah. But what's actually happening to the But what's actually happening to the But what's actually happening to the little bits of water? little bits of water? little bits of water? They're attaching to each other. Are They're attaching to each other. Are They're attaching to each other. Are they attach They're attaching. And this they attach They're attaching. And this they attach They're attaching. And this is This is all the guess work here. I is This is all the guess work here. I is This is all the guess work here. I imagine they're attaching to each other. imagine they're attaching to each other. imagine they're attaching to each other. They're forming a more solid endpiece. They're forming a more solid endpiece. They're forming a more solid endpiece. You cool liquid water down and then at You cool liquid water down and then at You cool liquid water down and then at some point, what happens to it? I don't some point, what happens to it? I don't some point, what happens to it? I don't know. Slows down, freezes, and stops know. Slows down, freezes, and stops know. Slows down, freezes, and stops moving. moving. moving. The molecules become frozen. The molecules become frozen. The molecules become frozen. How do they become frozen? How do they become frozen? How do they become frozen? They They They join together. They uh accumulate. They join together. They uh accumulate. They join together. They uh accumulate. They coagulate. coagulate. coagulate. Coagulate is not the technical term for Coagulate is not the technical term for Coagulate is not the technical term for it, but everyone was on the right track. it, but everyone was on the right track. it, but everyone was on the right track. In ice, the water molecules are In ice, the water molecules are In ice, the water molecules are basically fixed in place. They form a basically fixed in place. They form a basically fixed in place. They form a crystal lattice where their only motion crystal lattice where their only motion crystal lattice where their only motion is vibrating. So, what happens if we is vibrating. So, what happens if we is vibrating. So, what happens if we heat up the ice? heat up the ice? heat up the ice? Like, how what happens when like a solid Like, how what happens when like a solid Like, how what happens when like a solid melts? melts? melts? Um, they all bounce out. And Um, they all bounce out. And Um, they all bounce out. And what are we talking about? what are we talking about? what are we talking about? Melt. Melt. Melt. What? What is they What are they doing? What? What is they What are they doing? What? What is they What are they doing? Well, like in science, you draw little Well, like in science, you draw little Well, like in science, you draw little circles. circles. circles. What are those little circles? What are those little circles? What are those little circles? Oxygen. Oxygen. Oxygen. Are they just oxygen? Are they just oxygen? Are they just oxygen? Hydrogen. Oxygen. And the two Hydrogen. Oxygen. And the two Hydrogen. Oxygen. And the two And the two And the two And the two the temperature is higher. the temperature is higher. the temperature is higher. So, so the particles, they're less So, so the particles, they're less So, so the particles, they're less stable. stable. stable. Yeah. Yeah, less stable. Yeah. Yeah, less stable. Yeah. Yeah, less stable. Not stable. Not stable. Not stable. Less more free to move around. Less more free to move around. Less more free to move around. That sense, right? That sense, right? That sense, right? They become separate and they are They become separate and they are They become separate and they are allowed to move around. And in gas, allowed to move around. And in gas, allowed to move around. And in gas, maybe they're further apart. Is that Is maybe they're further apart. Is that Is maybe they're further apart. Is that Is that what we Okay. Okay. that what we Okay. Okay. that what we Okay. Okay. Fantastic. This guy has nailed it. Fantastic. This guy has nailed it. Fantastic. This guy has nailed it. All right. That makes sense. That's All right. That makes sense. That's All right. That makes sense. That's awesome. All right. awesome. All right. awesome. All right. So, in liquid water, the water molecules So, in liquid water, the water molecules So, in liquid water, the water molecules not only vibrate, they can also rotate not only vibrate, they can also rotate not only vibrate, they can also rotate and slide past each other. And this is and slide past each other. And this is and slide past each other. And this is what allows the substance to flow. At what allows the substance to flow. At what allows the substance to flow. At even higher temperatures, the water even higher temperatures, the water even higher temperatures, the water molecules become free of that liquid and molecules become free of that liquid and molecules become free of that liquid and turn into water vapor. In that state, turn into water vapor. In that state, turn into water vapor. In that state, they are very very far apart and moving they are very very far apart and moving they are very very far apart and moving very quickly. So, the major differences very quickly. So, the major differences very quickly. So, the major differences between solid, liquid, and gas are the between solid, liquid, and gas are the between solid, liquid, and gas are the motion of the particles and the distance motion of the particles and the distance motion of the particles and the distance between them. Of course, you may want to between them. Of course, you may want to between them. Of course, you may want to meditate on these differences some more. meditate on these differences some more. meditate on these differences some more. Oh, what about the difference between a Oh, what about the difference between a Oh, what about the difference between a solid, a liquid, and a gas? Oh, that's solid, a liquid, and a gas? Oh, that's solid, a liquid, and a gas? Oh, that's easy. I teach meditation and it's all easy. I teach meditation and it's all easy. I teach meditation and it's all about the um as you deexite something about the um as you deexite something about the um as you deexite something so you deexite the mind you get more so you deexite the mind you get more so you deexite the mind you get more orderliness as you deexite water vapor orderliness as you deexite water vapor orderliness as you deexite water vapor you get water as you deexite water you you get water as you deexite water you you get water as you deexite water you get ice more orderly so in fact the get ice more orderly so in fact the get ice more orderly so in fact the molecular structure becomes more orderly molecular structure becomes more orderly molecular structure becomes more orderly that's the difference that's the difference that's the difference that sounds quite reasonable how do you that sounds quite reasonable how do you that sounds quite reasonable how do you deexite something deexite something deexite something well in in this case you actually remove well in in this case you actually remove well in in this case you actually remove energy from it in human beings you calm energy from it in human beings you calm energy from it in human beings you calm their minds down with meditation their minds down with meditation their minds down with meditation And that works. We get the excited. And that works. We get the excited. And that works. We get the excited. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Does that mean if I meditate too much I Does that mean if I meditate too much I Does that mean if I meditate too much I might turn into ice though? might turn into ice though? might turn into ice though? No. But you'll generally become cool. No. But you'll generally become cool. No. But you'll generally become cool. [Laughter] [Laughter] [Laughter] Good answer, sir. Thank you so much.