Title: Supercooled Water - Explained!
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ph8xusY3GTM

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, you want to see water freeze almost So, you want to see water freeze almost So, you want to see water freeze almost immediately? Well, here's what you're immediately? Well, here's what you're immediately? Well, here's what you're going to need. Uh, some very pure water. going to need. Uh, some very pure water. going to need. Uh, some very pure water. Fiji water has been recommended to me uh Fiji water has been recommended to me uh Fiji water has been recommended to me uh by a friend. And obviously, we're going by a friend. And obviously, we're going by a friend. And obviously, we're going to need a freezer, some way to cool it to need a freezer, some way to cool it to need a freezer, some way to cool it down. So, I'm going to put this uh down. So, I'm going to put this uh down. So, I'm going to put this uh bottle of water in the freezer in the bottle of water in the freezer in the bottle of water in the freezer in the area normally occupied by the ice cube area normally occupied by the ice cube area normally occupied by the ice cube trays cuz I think that might be the trays cuz I think that might be the trays cuz I think that might be the coldest part of my freezer. I've got two coldest part of my freezer. I've got two coldest part of my freezer. I've got two bottles just in case one doesn't work. bottles just in case one doesn't work. bottles just in case one doesn't work. And now we have to wait. There are lots And now we have to wait. There are lots And now we have to wait. There are lots and lots of videos showing this and lots of videos showing this and lots of videos showing this phenomena on YouTube, but very few that phenomena on YouTube, but very few that phenomena on YouTube, but very few that explain how it actually works. So, I'd explain how it actually works. So, I'd explain how it actually works. So, I'd like to take a minute and do that. Water like to take a minute and do that. Water like to take a minute and do that. Water is normally a liquid at room temperature is normally a liquid at room temperature is normally a liquid at room temperature because the water molecules are all because the water molecules are all because the water molecules are all flowing past each other, tumbling around flowing past each other, tumbling around flowing past each other, tumbling around each other, and that allows the each other, and that allows the each other, and that allows the substance to flow. When something substance to flow. When something substance to flow. When something becomes solid, its molecules all more or becomes solid, its molecules all more or becomes solid, its molecules all more or less lock into place. They still less lock into place. They still less lock into place. They still vibrate, but they're not rolling over vibrate, but they're not rolling over vibrate, but they're not rolling over each other and moving past each other. each other and moving past each other. each other and moving past each other. So, they can no longer flow. They're So, they can no longer flow. They're So, they can no longer flow. They're solid. Now, what we're doing here is solid. Now, what we're doing here is solid. Now, what we're doing here is super cooling the water. So, we're super cooling the water. So, we're super cooling the water. So, we're taking it below its temperature, below taking it below its temperature, below taking it below its temperature, below 0° where it will it should become ice. 0° where it will it should become ice. 0° where it will it should become ice. But it's very difficult for that water But it's very difficult for that water But it's very difficult for that water to make the transition without somewhere to make the transition without somewhere to make the transition without somewhere for that ice crystal to start growing. for that ice crystal to start growing. for that ice crystal to start growing. So what we need is some kind of So what we need is some kind of So what we need is some kind of nucleation event. If the water is not nucleation event. If the water is not nucleation event. If the water is not pure, the impurities in the water pure, the impurities in the water pure, the impurities in the water naturally act as sites where the crystal naturally act as sites where the crystal naturally act as sites where the crystal can start forming. That's why it's very can start forming. That's why it's very can start forming. That's why it's very important that we use uh very very pure important that we use uh very very pure important that we use uh very very pure water. Another way we can cause this water. Another way we can cause this water. Another way we can cause this nucleation event is to bang the water nucleation event is to bang the water nucleation event is to bang the water bottle. Hopefully that'll cause a few bottle. Hopefully that'll cause a few bottle. Hopefully that'll cause a few water molecules to line up in the right water molecules to line up in the right water molecules to line up in the right uh way and that will seed the rest of uh way and that will seed the rest of uh way and that will seed the rest of the ice crystal. the ice crystal. the ice crystal. So, uh, let's give it a few hours and So, uh, let's give it a few hours and So, uh, let's give it a few hours and we'll come back and try to nucleate we'll come back and try to nucleate we'll come back and try to nucleate this, uh, this ice forming event. All this, uh, this ice forming event. All this, uh, this ice forming event. All right, it's taken a few days and right, it's taken a few days and right, it's taken a few days and multiple attempts, but I think this multiple attempts, but I think this multiple attempts, but I think this could finally be it. I might have could finally be it. I might have could finally be it. I might have finally created super cooled water. So, finally created super cooled water. So, finally created super cooled water. So, uh, let's let's find out. I'm going to uh, let's let's find out. I'm going to uh, let's let's find out. I'm going to take the water very carefully out of the take the water very carefully out of the take the water very carefully out of the freezer. And now you can see clearly that And now you can see clearly that And now you can see clearly that the water is still liquid. You can see the water is still liquid. You can see the water is still liquid. You can see this air bubble floating around. And now this air bubble floating around. And now this air bubble floating around. And now I'm going to uh bang it on the counter I'm going to uh bang it on the counter I'm going to uh bang it on the counter and we will see if we can get an ice and we will see if we can get an ice and we will see if we can get an ice crystal to form. crystal to form. crystal to form. Whoa, look at that. You can see that ice Whoa, look at that. You can see that ice Whoa, look at that. You can see that ice crystal growing right down from the top crystal growing right down from the top crystal growing right down from the top to the bottom. to the bottom. to the bottom. So there you have it. I was finally able So there you have it. I was finally able So there you have it. I was finally able to demonstrate the super cooled water to demonstrate the super cooled water to demonstrate the super cooled water phenomenon. I cooled down the very pure phenomenon. I cooled down the very pure phenomenon. I cooled down the very pure water in my freezer for 2 or 3 hours and water in my freezer for 2 or 3 hours and water in my freezer for 2 or 3 hours and then by banging the water bottle on the then by banging the water bottle on the then by banging the water bottle on the counter, I started uh the formation of counter, I started uh the formation of counter, I started uh the formation of an ice crystal at the top of the bottle an ice crystal at the top of the bottle an ice crystal at the top of the bottle of water which quickly grew uh down to of water which quickly grew uh down to of water which quickly grew uh down to the bottom. Now, performing this the bottom. Now, performing this the bottom. Now, performing this experiment was a lot more difficult than experiment was a lot more difficult than experiment was a lot more difficult than I anticipated. I did this at least eight I anticipated. I did this at least eight I anticipated. I did this at least eight times with about five different bottles times with about five different bottles times with about five different bottles of water and I only managed to catch it of water and I only managed to catch it of water and I only managed to catch it on tape once. So, uh it was a real on tape once. So, uh it was a real on tape once. So, uh it was a real challenge. Things I learned were that challenge. Things I learned were that challenge. Things I learned were that you can't leave the water in the freezer you can't leave the water in the freezer you can't leave the water in the freezer too long, otherwise it will freeze up on too long, otherwise it will freeze up on too long, otherwise it will freeze up on its own accord. And also, you have to be its own accord. And also, you have to be its own accord. And also, you have to be very careful when pulling the water out very careful when pulling the water out very careful when pulling the water out of the freezer that you don't bump it of the freezer that you don't bump it of the freezer that you don't bump it because otherwise it will start freezing because otherwise it will start freezing because otherwise it will start freezing uh right away before you have a chance uh right away before you have a chance uh right away before you have a chance to uh uh to bang it on the counter. So, to uh uh to bang it on the counter. So, to uh uh to bang it on the counter. So, give it a try and see if you can make it give it a try and see if you can make it give it a try and see if you can make it work.