Title: The Biggest Misconception in Football (ft. Tom Brady)
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J3i3F2e4IYs

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en This is Tom Brady. He's the greatest This is Tom Brady. He's the greatest This is Tom Brady. He's the greatest American football quarterback of all American football quarterback of all American football quarterback of all time. Holy sh Can you hear it go by you? time. Holy sh Can you hear it go by you? time. Holy sh Can you hear it go by you? Yeah. Scary. He's won seven Super Bowls Yeah. Scary. He's won seven Super Bowls Yeah. Scary. He's won seven Super Bowls and has thrown the most touchdown passes and has thrown the most touchdown passes and has thrown the most touchdown passes in history. in history. in history. Oh, that one hurt the chest. I heard Oh, that one hurt the chest. I heard Oh, that one hurt the chest. I heard that right in the chest. I'm like glad that right in the chest. I'm like glad that right in the chest. I'm like glad I'm not catching those. Every I'm not catching those. Every I'm not catching those. Every quarterback takes pride in their ability quarterback takes pride in their ability quarterback takes pride in their ability to throw a tight spiral. The tighter the to throw a tight spiral. The tighter the to throw a tight spiral. The tighter the spiral you throw means the more control spiral you throw means the more control spiral you throw means the more control you have of the football. We analyzed you have of the football. We analyzed you have of the football. We analyzed his throw in detail. Have people shot his throw in detail. Have people shot his throw in detail. Have people shot you in really slow motion for the you in really slow motion for the you in really slow motion for the release and everything? Never. And release and everything? Never. And release and everything? Never. And discovered something surprising. Even discovered something surprising. Even discovered something surprising. Even Tom Brady can't throw a perfect spiral. Tom Brady can't throw a perfect spiral. Tom Brady can't throw a perfect spiral. Just look said on his deep passes. No Just look said on his deep passes. No Just look said on his deep passes. No matter how hard he tries to spin the matter how hard he tries to spin the matter how hard he tries to spin the ball cleanly around its long axis, if ball cleanly around its long axis, if ball cleanly around its long axis, if you look closely enough, you'll notice you look closely enough, you'll notice you look closely enough, you'll notice this little wobble. Not only that, this little wobble. Not only that, this little wobble. Not only that, there's a slight drift to the ball, there's a slight drift to the ball, there's a slight drift to the ball, which means even Tom Brady can't throw which means even Tom Brady can't throw which means even Tom Brady can't throw straight. Virtually all his long passes straight. Virtually all his long passes straight. Virtually all his long passes curve to the right. But these aren't curve to the right. But these aren't curve to the right. But these aren't mistakes. They're actually fundamental mistakes. They're actually fundamental mistakes. They're actually fundamental to the physics of throwing a football to the physics of throwing a football to the physics of throwing a football accurately. To find out why, we ran a accurately. To find out why, we ran a accurately. To find out why, we ran a full computational fluid dynamics full computational fluid dynamics full computational fluid dynamics analysis, tested spinning balls in a analysis, tested spinning balls in a analysis, tested spinning balls in a wind tunnel, and even embedded sensors wind tunnel, and even embedded sensors wind tunnel, and even embedded sensors in real footballs. That's crazy. Now, in real footballs. That's crazy. Now, in real footballs. That's crazy. Now, admittedly, who are we to tell Tom Brady admittedly, who are we to tell Tom Brady admittedly, who are we to tell Tom Brady anything about anything about anything about football? I've never really played much football? I've never really played much football? I've never really played much football. I grew up in Canada. I'd be football. I grew up in Canada. I'd be football. I grew up in Canada. I'd be much happier to be playing hockey. Like, much happier to be playing hockey. Like, much happier to be playing hockey. Like, why can't I throw at all? That is so why can't I throw at all? That is so why can't I throw at all? That is so rough. Okay. Well, he'll walk you rough. Okay. Well, he'll walk you rough. Okay. Well, he'll walk you through it. I'm not going to bother through it. I'm not going to bother through it. I'm not going to bother doing it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Try to doing it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Try to doing it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Try to do this. Overexaggerate the tilt. So, do this. Overexaggerate the tilt. So, do this. Overexaggerate the tilt. So, instead of standing straight up, lean instead of standing straight up, lean instead of standing straight up, lean forward. Lean like you're almost like a forward. Lean like you're almost like a forward. Lean like you're almost like a short stop, right? Yeah. And like you're short stop, right? Yeah. And like you're short stop, right? Yeah. And like you're falling over and then you're just here falling over and then you're just here falling over and then you're just here like that. Good catch. So lean over a like that. Good catch. So lean over a like that. Good catch. So lean over a little bit. I'm like not ready for it. little bit. I'm like not ready for it. little bit. I'm like not ready for it. So get down like a short stop. Even So get down like a short stop. Even So get down like a short stop. Even more. Even more. Yeah. Now throw it more. Even more. Yeah. Now throw it more. Even more. Yeah. Now throw it sidearm. I feel like this is weird. sidearm. I feel like this is weird. sidearm. I feel like this is weird. There you go. That was a better throw. There you go. That was a better throw. There you go. That was a better throw. That is a better throw. It was really That is a better throw. It was really That is a better throw. It was really good. What's the key to throwing like a good. What's the key to throwing like a good. What's the key to throwing like a really tight spiral? The key to me is really tight spiral? The key to me is really tight spiral? The key to me is first of all, you got to have very light first of all, you got to have very light first of all, you got to have very light grip pressure on the football. I learned grip pressure on the football. I learned grip pressure on the football. I learned over a period of time that I had to be over a period of time that I had to be over a period of time that I had to be really efficient with my mechanics. I really efficient with my mechanics. I really efficient with my mechanics. I had to have all my energy going right had to have all my energy going right had to have all my energy going right toward the target with a very relaxed toward the target with a very relaxed toward the target with a very relaxed posture. And then it's a really smooth, posture. And then it's a really smooth, posture. And then it's a really smooth, efficient throwing motion. And then how efficient throwing motion. And then how efficient throwing motion. And then how are you actually imparting the spin to are you actually imparting the spin to are you actually imparting the spin to the ball? So you're really popping your the ball? So you're really popping your the ball? So you're really popping your wrist at the end. So I can even go wrist at the end. So I can even go wrist at the end. So I can even go really slow and just pop my wrist at the really slow and just pop my wrist at the really slow and just pop my wrist at the end. And even that little bit of wrist end. And even that little bit of wrist end. And even that little bit of wrist pop will create a little snap on the pop will create a little snap on the pop will create a little snap on the ball as it releases from my fingertips. ball as it releases from my fingertips. ball as it releases from my fingertips. Henry, you can't drop the easy one. Henry, you can't drop the easy one. Henry, you can't drop the easy one. That snap and the spin it creates is the That snap and the spin it creates is the That snap and the spin it creates is the key to Brady's record-breaking throw. key to Brady's record-breaking throw. key to Brady's record-breaking throw. But the big question is why? I mean, But the big question is why? I mean, But the big question is why? I mean, what does the spin actually do to the what does the spin actually do to the what does the spin actually do to the football? It seems like such a simple football? It seems like such a simple football? It seems like such a simple question, but the physics turned out to question, but the physics turned out to question, but the physics turned out to be much more complicated than I be much more complicated than I be much more complicated than I initially thought. In fact, physicists initially thought. In fact, physicists initially thought. In fact, physicists studying the problem didn't get close to studying the problem didn't get close to studying the problem didn't get close to the real answer until just 5 years ago. the real answer until just 5 years ago. the real answer until just 5 years ago. So, let's break it down from the start. So, let's break it down from the start. So, let's break it down from the start. A question for Tom is, can he throw the A question for Tom is, can he throw the A question for Tom is, can he throw the ball without spinning it? Like a knuckle ball without spinning it? Like a knuckle ball without spinning it? Like a knuckle ball? Yeah. Could you Can you knuckle ball? Yeah. Could you Can you knuckle ball? Yeah. Could you Can you knuckle ball a football? Yeah, I could try. Can ball a football? Yeah, I could try. Can ball a football? Yeah, I could try. Can I throw it underhand? Yeah, however you I throw it underhand? Yeah, however you I throw it underhand? Yeah, however you want to toss it. want to toss it. want to toss it. Even overhand, there's no way to do it Even overhand, there's no way to do it Even overhand, there's no way to do it without getting a spin on it or it's without getting a spin on it or it's without getting a spin on it or it's just going to mess with you. I mean, just going to mess with you. I mean, just going to mess with you. I mean, you'd have to almost throw it sideways. you'd have to almost throw it sideways. you'd have to almost throw it sideways. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that spun a little bit. When you Oh, that spun a little bit. When you Oh, that spun a little bit. When you launch a ball without spin, perfectly launch a ball without spin, perfectly launch a ball without spin, perfectly aligned with the direction of motion, it aligned with the direction of motion, it aligned with the direction of motion, it seems like the air flowing over the ball seems like the air flowing over the ball seems like the air flowing over the ball will be totally symmetric. But this is will be totally symmetric. But this is will be totally symmetric. But this is unstable. Any slight disturbance, like a unstable. Any slight disturbance, like a unstable. Any slight disturbance, like a tiny bit of wind, will cause more air to tiny bit of wind, will cause more air to tiny bit of wind, will cause more air to hit one side than the other. And that hit one side than the other. And that hit one side than the other. And that starts to change the ball's orientation. starts to change the ball's orientation. starts to change the ball's orientation. And now more area on that side is And now more area on that side is And now more area on that side is exposed to the oncoming air, so it exposed to the oncoming air, so it exposed to the oncoming air, so it deflects even more. So drag on the ball deflects even more. So drag on the ball deflects even more. So drag on the ball increases. It's pushed off course and it increases. It's pushed off course and it increases. It's pushed off course and it can begin to tumble. The total drag can begin to tumble. The total drag can begin to tumble. The total drag force on the ball is proportional to the force on the ball is proportional to the force on the ball is proportional to the area presented to the airflow and the area presented to the airflow and the area presented to the airflow and the drag coefficient. That's just a measure drag coefficient. That's just a measure drag coefficient. That's just a measure of how streamlined an object is. Pointed of how streamlined an object is. Pointed of how streamlined an object is. Pointed straight in the direction of motion. A straight in the direction of motion. A straight in the direction of motion. A football is pretty streamlined with a football is pretty streamlined with a football is pretty streamlined with a drag coefficient of just 0.14. That's drag coefficient of just 0.14. That's drag coefficient of just 0.14. That's better than a bullet. But on its side, better than a bullet. But on its side, better than a bullet. But on its side, the drag coefficient is 0.85. 85, which the drag coefficient is 0.85. 85, which the drag coefficient is 0.85. 85, which is worse than a cow. Man, I'm learning a is worse than a cow. Man, I'm learning a is worse than a cow. Man, I'm learning a lot today. That's what I'm going to use lot today. That's what I'm going to use lot today. That's what I'm going to use with all the quarterbacks going, "Man, with all the quarterbacks going, "Man, with all the quarterbacks going, "Man, your drag coefficient your drag coefficient your drag coefficient sucks. What are we doing? We sucks. What are we doing? We sucks. What are we doing? We need.14.85. No good." To make matters need.14.85. No good." To make matters need.14.85. No good." To make matters worse, when a football is going worse, when a football is going worse, when a football is going sideways, it exposes nearly 70% more sideways, it exposes nearly 70% more sideways, it exposes nearly 70% more area to the oncoming air. And combined area to the oncoming air. And combined area to the oncoming air. And combined with the higher drag coefficient, this with the higher drag coefficient, this with the higher drag coefficient, this means that the drag force is 10 times means that the drag force is 10 times means that the drag force is 10 times greater than when the football is greater than when the football is greater than when the football is aligned with the throw. So an unspinning aligned with the throw. So an unspinning aligned with the throw. So an unspinning ball can end up going sideways, meaning ball can end up going sideways, meaning ball can end up going sideways, meaning it decelerates up to 10 times faster. it decelerates up to 10 times faster. it decelerates up to 10 times faster. Plus, as it tumbles, the air pushes on Plus, as it tumbles, the air pushes on Plus, as it tumbles, the air pushes on it in different directions, making it it in different directions, making it it in different directions, making it move unpredictably. Now, in some cases, move unpredictably. Now, in some cases, move unpredictably. Now, in some cases, you actually want this, like when you actually want this, like when you actually want this, like when kicking the ball back to the other team. kicking the ball back to the other team. kicking the ball back to the other team. Punters sometimes intentionally kick the Punters sometimes intentionally kick the Punters sometimes intentionally kick the ball end over end so that it gets pushed ball end over end so that it gets pushed ball end over end so that it gets pushed around erratically. That makes it far around erratically. That makes it far around erratically. That makes it far harder for the opposing team to predict harder for the opposing team to predict harder for the opposing team to predict where the ball's going to go and get where the ball's going to go and get where the ball's going to go and get under it. But when you're passing to under it. But when you're passing to under it. But when you're passing to your own team, you want the ball to be your own team, you want the ball to be your own team, you want the ball to be predictable and go as fast and as far as predictable and go as fast and as far as predictable and go as fast and as far as possible. And for that, you need spin. The benefits of spin really became spin. The benefits of spin really became spin. The benefits of spin really became clear in the mid 1800s during the Creian clear in the mid 1800s during the Creian clear in the mid 1800s during the Creian War. Back then, soldiers were armed with War. Back then, soldiers were armed with War. Back then, soldiers were armed with musketss that fired round lead balls. musketss that fired round lead balls. musketss that fired round lead balls. And to make reloading faster on the And to make reloading faster on the And to make reloading faster on the battlefield, these musket balls were battlefield, these musket balls were battlefield, these musket balls were made significantly smaller than the made significantly smaller than the made significantly smaller than the barrel. But when the gunpowder was barrel. But when the gunpowder was barrel. But when the gunpowder was ignited, some of the expanding gases ignited, some of the expanding gases ignited, some of the expanding gases would then escape around the bullet, would then escape around the bullet, would then escape around the bullet, making the bullet's exit velocity making the bullet's exit velocity making the bullet's exit velocity unpredictable. This, combined with unpredictable. This, combined with unpredictable. This, combined with inconsistent manufacturing and the round inconsistent manufacturing and the round inconsistent manufacturing and the round ball's poor aerodynamics, meant that ball's poor aerodynamics, meant that ball's poor aerodynamics, meant that musketss were somewhat unreliable. There musketss were somewhat unreliable. There musketss were somewhat unreliable. There was a British Army musketry instructor was a British Army musketry instructor was a British Army musketry instructor who famously said, "I'm willing to stand who famously said, "I'm willing to stand who famously said, "I'm willing to stand and be shot at all day long as long as and be shot at all day long as long as and be shot at all day long as long as whoever's shooting at me with the smooth whoever's shooting at me with the smooth whoever's shooting at me with the smooth musket promises to aim at me every musket promises to aim at me every musket promises to aim at me every single time because he knew the bullet's single time because he knew the bullet's single time because he knew the bullet's never actually going to go where the gun never actually going to go where the gun never actually going to go where the gun is being aimed." All of that changed in is being aimed." All of that changed in is being aimed." All of that changed in the fall of the fall of the fall of 1854. Russian troops huddled in 1854. Russian troops huddled in 1854. Russian troops huddled in Sevastapole under siege by French and Sevastapole under siege by French and Sevastapole under siege by French and British forces. The soldiers watched as British forces. The soldiers watched as British forces. The soldiers watched as British troops set up on a distant British troops set up on a distant British troops set up on a distant hillside. They were far out of standard hillside. They were far out of standard hillside. They were far out of standard musket range, so the Russians weren't musket range, so the Russians weren't musket range, so the Russians weren't worried. When worried. When worried. When suddenly, a window shatters. They were suddenly, a window shatters. They were suddenly, a window shatters. They were shooting through the windows of the shooting through the windows of the shooting through the windows of the Russian barracks at their naval base in Russian barracks at their naval base in Russian barracks at their naval base in Lost 900 yd away. They're shooting Lost 900 yd away. They're shooting Lost 900 yd away. They're shooting bullets through the bullets through the bullets through the windows. But these were no ordinary windows. But these were no ordinary windows. But these were no ordinary bullets. bullets. bullets. Eight years earlier, an enterprising Eight years earlier, an enterprising Eight years earlier, an enterprising French army officer, Claude Etien French army officer, Claude Etien French army officer, Claude Etien Minier, made a breakthrough. He Minier, made a breakthrough. He Minier, made a breakthrough. He developed a conicle bullet with a hollow developed a conicle bullet with a hollow developed a conicle bullet with a hollow base and an iron plug that would fit base and an iron plug that would fit base and an iron plug that would fit into it. So when fired, the gas pressure into it. So when fired, the gas pressure into it. So when fired, the gas pressure drove the plug into the base, which drove the plug into the base, which drove the plug into the base, which expanded the bullet, pressing it firmly expanded the bullet, pressing it firmly expanded the bullet, pressing it firmly against the barrel walls, so no gas against the barrel walls, so no gas against the barrel walls, so no gas could escape. This made the bullet's could escape. This made the bullet's could escape. This made the bullet's muzzle velocity much more predictable. muzzle velocity much more predictable. muzzle velocity much more predictable. But it also enabled something else. The But it also enabled something else. The But it also enabled something else. The expanded bullet could grip spiral expanded bullet could grip spiral expanded bullet could grip spiral grooves carved into the inside of the grooves carved into the inside of the grooves carved into the inside of the barrel called rifling. This imparted barrel called rifling. This imparted barrel called rifling. This imparted spin to the bullet as it shot out. And spin to the bullet as it shot out. And spin to the bullet as it shot out. And this is key because all spinning objects this is key because all spinning objects this is key because all spinning objects have a fundamental quantity they have a fundamental quantity they have a fundamental quantity they conserve, angular momentum. This helps conserve, angular momentum. This helps conserve, angular momentum. This helps them resist changes in their them resist changes in their them resist changes in their orientation. It's just like the spinning orientation. It's just like the spinning orientation. It's just like the spinning top. Now, without spin, the top just top. Now, without spin, the top just top. Now, without spin, the top just falls over like you'd expect. But if we falls over like you'd expect. But if we falls over like you'd expect. But if we add a little bit of add a little bit of add a little bit of spin, we can see that it resists changes spin, we can see that it resists changes spin, we can see that it resists changes in its orientation. So if I give it a in its orientation. So if I give it a in its orientation. So if I give it a little touch, it reorients itself in the little touch, it reorients itself in the little touch, it reorients itself in the direction of its angular direction of its angular direction of its angular momentum. A similar thing happens with a momentum. A similar thing happens with a momentum. A similar thing happens with a spinning bullet. Its angular momentum spinning bullet. Its angular momentum spinning bullet. Its angular momentum resists changes to its axis of rotation. resists changes to its axis of rotation. resists changes to its axis of rotation. So even if wind applies an unbalanced So even if wind applies an unbalanced So even if wind applies an unbalanced force to the bullet, it maintains its force to the bullet, it maintains its force to the bullet, it maintains its orientation. This reduces drag and helps orientation. This reduces drag and helps orientation. This reduces drag and helps the projectile fly further, faster, and the projectile fly further, faster, and the projectile fly further, faster, and more accurately. The exact same thing is more accurately. The exact same thing is more accurately. The exact same thing is going on when Tom Brady throws a tight going on when Tom Brady throws a tight going on when Tom Brady throws a tight spiral. The important part of a spiral spiral. The important part of a spiral spiral. The important part of a spiral is you feel the wind blowing at us. If is you feel the wind blowing at us. If is you feel the wind blowing at us. If the ball wobbles at all, it's going to the ball wobbles at all, it's going to the ball wobbles at all, it's going to catch a lot of resistance and the wind catch a lot of resistance and the wind catch a lot of resistance and the wind and it's going to slow the velocity of and it's going to slow the velocity of and it's going to slow the velocity of the ball down a lot and the accuracy. the ball down a lot and the accuracy. the ball down a lot and the accuracy. The tighter the spiral and the more it The tighter the spiral and the more it The tighter the spiral and the more it spins, the more it can just rotate spins, the more it can just rotate spins, the more it can just rotate through the air and that the wind will through the air and that the wind will through the air and that the wind will have a less effect on the ball. So for have a less effect on the ball. So for have a less effect on the ball. So for any good quarterback, the ability to any good quarterback, the ability to any good quarterback, the ability to throw a tight spiral is really important throw a tight spiral is really important throw a tight spiral is really important when you play in windy conditions. A when you play in windy conditions. A when you play in windy conditions. A spinning ball will maintain its spinning ball will maintain its spinning ball will maintain its orientation and therefore cut through orientation and therefore cut through orientation and therefore cut through the air with a smaller frontal area and the air with a smaller frontal area and the air with a smaller frontal area and a lower drag coefficient. This all makes a lower drag coefficient. This all makes a lower drag coefficient. This all makes sense, but here's where things get sense, but here's where things get sense, but here's where things get weird. If the ball is maintaining its weird. If the ball is maintaining its weird. If the ball is maintaining its orientation, then on a long hailmary orientation, then on a long hailmary orientation, then on a long hailmary pass, it should stay pitched up like pass, it should stay pitched up like pass, it should stay pitched up like this the whole time, just like when it this the whole time, just like when it this the whole time, just like when it was thrown. was thrown. was thrown. But that is not what happens. There's But that is not what happens. There's But that is not what happens. There's kind of a paradox in football, which is kind of a paradox in football, which is kind of a paradox in football, which is when you release the ball, you're when you release the ball, you're when you release the ball, you're angled, say, positive 30°. Okay? And angled, say, positive 30°. Okay? And angled, say, positive 30°. Okay? And when the receiver catches it, it's when the receiver catches it, it's when the receiver catches it, it's angled negative 30°. Perfect. I love angled negative 30°. Perfect. I love angled negative 30°. Perfect. I love that. So, what we just said was angular that. So, what we just said was angular that. So, what we just said was angular momentum makes the ball hard to pivot. momentum makes the ball hard to pivot. momentum makes the ball hard to pivot. Okay? But what we saw was it pitches Okay? But what we saw was it pitches Okay? But what we saw was it pitches from this to this in 4 seconds. So, is from this to this in 4 seconds. So, is from this to this in 4 seconds. So, is it turnover is what we would call that. it turnover is what we would call that. it turnover is what we would call that. Now, turnover is essential to a good Now, turnover is essential to a good Now, turnover is essential to a good throw because it means at every point throw because it means at every point throw because it means at every point along the arc, the ball's orientation along the arc, the ball's orientation along the arc, the ball's orientation stays closely aligned with its direction stays closely aligned with its direction stays closely aligned with its direction of motion. That means it stays pointed of motion. That means it stays pointed of motion. That means it stays pointed directly into the airflow, which directly into the airflow, which directly into the airflow, which minimizes drag. Now, sure, you might minimizes drag. Now, sure, you might minimizes drag. Now, sure, you might think this isn't that crazy. I mean, think this isn't that crazy. I mean, think this isn't that crazy. I mean, arrows and birdies align themselves arrows and birdies align themselves arrows and birdies align themselves along the path of the ark as well. But along the path of the ark as well. But along the path of the ark as well. But that works in these cases because the that works in these cases because the that works in these cases because the objects are front weighted. The feathers objects are front weighted. The feathers objects are front weighted. The feathers catch the air and get pushed behind the catch the air and get pushed behind the catch the air and get pushed behind the heavier tip, which leads the way. heavier tip, which leads the way. heavier tip, which leads the way. But a football is totally different. I But a football is totally different. I But a football is totally different. I mean, it doesn't have feathers or fins, mean, it doesn't have feathers or fins, mean, it doesn't have feathers or fins, and its weight is evenly distributed and its weight is evenly distributed and its weight is evenly distributed along its axis. So, it just can't use along its axis. So, it just can't use along its axis. So, it just can't use the same mechanisms to align itself. So, the same mechanisms to align itself. So, the same mechanisms to align itself. So, in 2020, the editor-inchief of the in 2020, the editor-inchief of the in 2020, the editor-inchief of the American Journal of Physics decided to American Journal of Physics decided to American Journal of Physics decided to figure it out. I was surprised at how figure it out. I was surprised at how figure it out. I was surprised at how many bad explanations that were easy to many bad explanations that were easy to many bad explanations that were easy to debunk got published. When you think debunk got published. When you think debunk got published. When you think about it, it doesn't make any sense about it, it doesn't make any sense about it, it doesn't make any sense because the air resistance would push because the air resistance would push because the air resistance would push the nose of the football up and you want the nose of the football up and you want the nose of the football up and you want the nose of the football to go down. So, the nose of the football to go down. So, the nose of the football to go down. So, it's pretty curious. So, Price put it's pretty curious. So, Price put it's pretty curious. So, Price put together a theoretical model to explain together a theoretical model to explain together a theoretical model to explain the football's turnover. And today, the football's turnover. And today, the football's turnover. And today, we're going to see whether his findings we're going to see whether his findings we're going to see whether his findings hold up by simulating Tom Brady's own hold up by simulating Tom Brady's own hold up by simulating Tom Brady's own throws in a wind tunnel. The idea of throws in a wind tunnel. The idea of throws in a wind tunnel. The idea of having anything to do with Tom Brady, having anything to do with Tom Brady, having anything to do with Tom Brady, whom I greatly respect, not only because whom I greatly respect, not only because whom I greatly respect, not only because of his skill, but because of his work of his skill, but because of his work of his skill, but because of his work ethic, it's ethic, it's ethic, it's otherworldly. We have these sensors in otherworldly. We have these sensors in otherworldly. We have these sensors in these balls, so we should be able to see these balls, so we should be able to see these balls, so we should be able to see how fast balls are actually going from how fast balls are actually going from how fast balls are actually going from inside the ball. And just to be sure, inside the ball. And just to be sure, inside the ball. And just to be sure, I'm measuring the speed of these balls I'm measuring the speed of these balls I'm measuring the speed of these balls the old-fashioned way. A decision I the old-fashioned way. A decision I the old-fashioned way. A decision I might regret. Do you want to go right on might regret. Do you want to go right on might regret. Do you want to go right on the side of the dummy with the gun? I'll the side of the dummy with the gun? I'll the side of the dummy with the gun? I'll throw it right over your head. throw it right over your head. throw it right over your head. I won't hit you. Trust me. Yeah. Right I won't hit you. Trust me. Yeah. Right I won't hit you. Trust me. Yeah. Right there. there. there. Perfect. You ready? Yep. 45. Maybe scoot just a smidge more that 45. Maybe scoot just a smidge more that 45. Maybe scoot just a smidge more that way. way. way. [Music] Perfect. Perfect. Perfect. Holy Holy Holy 46. You going to do another one? Yeah. 49. My god, that's scary. That's like 80 49. My god, that's scary. That's like 80 49. My god, that's scary. That's like 80 km an hour. But would you actually use km an hour. But would you actually use km an hour. But would you actually use that speed in a game? That'd be a good that speed in a game? That'd be a good that speed in a game? That'd be a good speed. That's a normal pass. That's like speed. That's a normal pass. That's like speed. That's a normal pass. That's like terrifying. terrifying. terrifying. And that's just for a regular throw. For And that's just for a regular throw. For And that's just for a regular throw. For his long throws, the speed jumps even his long throws, the speed jumps even his long throws, the speed jumps even higher. Over 60 mph. That's almost 100 higher. Over 60 mph. That's almost 100 higher. Over 60 mph. That's almost 100 kmh. kmh. kmh. Now, I'm not about to step in front of Now, I'm not about to step in front of Now, I'm not about to step in front of that cannon. I was not built for being that cannon. I was not built for being that cannon. I was not built for being an athlete. You're built for analyzing an athlete. You're built for analyzing an athlete. You're built for analyzing the That's right. I'm here for the data. the That's right. I'm here for the data. the That's right. I'm here for the data. And that's why I've got Henry here. Oh, And that's why I've got Henry here. Oh, And that's why I've got Henry here. Oh, that one hurt the chest. I heard that. that one hurt the chest. I heard that. that one hurt the chest. I heard that. Sure. You don't want to swap in, Derek? Sure. You don't want to swap in, Derek? Sure. You don't want to swap in, Derek? You're doing great. When Tom Brady is throwing, you great. When Tom Brady is throwing, you great. When Tom Brady is throwing, you got to react fast. But that kind of got to react fast. But that kind of got to react fast. But that kind of pressure isn't limited to the football pressure isn't limited to the football pressure isn't limited to the football field. Now, the internet's a lot like field. Now, the internet's a lot like field. Now, the internet's a lot like football. When you're online, threats football. When you're online, threats football. When you're online, threats are coming at you from all sides. are coming at you from all sides. are coming at you from all sides. Now you got hackers, you got trackers, Now you got hackers, you got trackers, Now you got hackers, you got trackers, you got ads for things you never even you got ads for things you never even you got ads for things you never even googled. And you don't even have to be googled. And you don't even have to be googled. And you don't even have to be near someone to mess with near someone to mess with near someone to mess with [Laughter] [Laughter] [Laughter] them. With today's sponsor, NordVPN, them. With today's sponsor, NordVPN, them. With today's sponsor, NordVPN, it's like having your own offensive it's like having your own offensive it's like having your own offensive line. NordVPN gives you real protection. line. NordVPN gives you real protection. line. NordVPN gives you real protection. It hides your IP, masks your location, It hides your IP, masks your location, It hides your IP, masks your location, and encrypts all your internet traffic and encrypts all your internet traffic and encrypts all your internet traffic so no one sees what you're doing online. so no one sees what you're doing online. so no one sees what you're doing online. Threat protection blocks malware, stops Threat protection blocks malware, stops Threat protection blocks malware, stops trackers, and even protects you from trackers, and even protects you from trackers, and even protects you from those annoying ads. It even works when those annoying ads. It even works when those annoying ads. It even works when you're not connected to a VPN. Plus, you're not connected to a VPN. Plus, you're not connected to a VPN. Plus, NordVPN has a strict no logs policy, so NordVPN has a strict no logs policy, so NordVPN has a strict no logs policy, so they never track, collect, or share your they never track, collect, or share your they never track, collect, or share your private private private data. And you can use it on up to 10 data. And you can use it on up to 10 data. And you can use it on up to 10 devices with one account, desktop, devices with one account, desktop, devices with one account, desktop, tablet, or even your phone. So, you're tablet, or even your phone. So, you're tablet, or even your phone. So, you're protected even when you're on the field. protected even when you're on the field. protected even when you're on the field. When you're online, don't just stand When you're online, don't just stand When you're online, don't just stand there unprotected. Set up your own there unprotected. Set up your own there unprotected. Set up your own offensive line. To be clear, NordVPN offensive line. To be clear, NordVPN offensive line. To be clear, NordVPN does not come with five 300lb linemen, does not come with five 300lb linemen, does not come with five 300lb linemen, but it does protect your connection like but it does protect your connection like but it does protect your connection like one of them. Nord is giving you an one of them. Nord is giving you an one of them. Nord is giving you an exclusive discount through my link. So, exclusive discount through my link. So, exclusive discount through my link. So, when you sign up, make sure to go to when you sign up, make sure to go to when you sign up, make sure to go to nordvpn.com/veritassium or just scan nordvpn.com/veritassium or just scan nordvpn.com/veritassium or just scan this handy QR code. And with this deal, this handy QR code. And with this deal, this handy QR code. And with this deal, you'll get a discount on a 2-year plan you'll get a discount on a 2-year plan you'll get a discount on a 2-year plan plus an extra 4 months free. And if plus an extra 4 months free. And if plus an extra 4 months free. And if you're still not totally convinced, Nord you're still not totally convinced, Nord you're still not totally convinced, Nord has a 30-day money back guarantee. So, has a 30-day money back guarantee. So, has a 30-day money back guarantee. So, you can try it out completely risk- you can try it out completely risk- you can try it out completely risk- free. Just check it out at free. Just check it out at free. Just check it out at nordvpn.com/veritassium. I'd like to nordvpn.com/veritassium. I'd like to nordvpn.com/veritassium. I'd like to thank NordVPN for sponsoring this video. thank NordVPN for sponsoring this video. thank NordVPN for sponsoring this video. And now back to Tom Brady. And now back to Tom Brady. And now back to Tom Brady. Have people shot you in really slow Have people shot you in really slow Have people shot you in really slow motion for the release and everything? motion for the release and everything? motion for the release and everything? Did you ever watch that back? Never. You Did you ever watch that back? Never. You Did you ever watch that back? Never. You guys ready? guys ready? guys ready? I'm ready. Three, two, one. Oh my god. Oh my god. Oh my god. Are you good? You good, Ricky? Yeah. Are you good? You good, Ricky? Yeah. Are you good? You good, Ricky? Yeah. Yeah, I'm good. I'm good. Is that plexi Yeah, I'm good. I'm good. Is that plexi Yeah, I'm good. I'm good. Is that plexi or is that real glass? That's or is that real glass? That's or is that real glass? That's plexiglass. That's incredible. You get plexiglass. That's incredible. You get plexiglass. That's incredible. You get one shot of these things. Oh. All right. one shot of these things. Oh. All right. one shot of these things. Oh. All right. I'd have given it my best. Should we try I'd have given it my best. Should we try I'd have given it my best. Should we try one more? Even if the camera breaks. I one more? Even if the camera breaks. I one more? Even if the camera breaks. I don't see the cracks. Wow. So, we can go don't see the cracks. Wow. So, we can go don't see the cracks. Wow. So, we can go again. Let's try one more. Let me just again. Let's try one more. Let me just again. Let's try one more. Let me just throw a little harder. Let's Let's go throw a little harder. Let's Let's go throw a little harder. Let's Let's go again. I'm going to throw a little again. I'm going to throw a little again. I'm going to throw a little harder. [Music] [Music] [Music] Now we're broken. That went right there. Are we able to watch the throw back? Are we able to watch the throw back? Are we able to watch the throw back? Good spiral. Oh, that's so cool. The sensors show Oh, that's so cool. The sensors show Oh, that's so cool. The sensors show Brady's maximum spin rate on this day Brady's maximum spin rate on this day Brady's maximum spin rate on this day was 628 revolutions per was 628 revolutions per was 628 revolutions per minute. So, armed with this data, let's minute. So, armed with this data, let's minute. So, armed with this data, let's analyze Brady's throws in a wind tunnel. analyze Brady's throws in a wind tunnel. analyze Brady's throws in a wind tunnel. How much data are you used to getting? How much data are you used to getting? How much data are you used to getting? Zero. Really? When we when I played, Zero. Really? When we when I played, Zero. Really? When we when I played, yeah, none of it was available. So, this is the low-speed wind tunnel So, this is the low-speed wind tunnel So, this is the low-speed wind tunnel here at the university. This wind tunnel here at the university. This wind tunnel here at the university. This wind tunnel facility can get up to about Mach.2, so facility can get up to about Mach.2, so facility can get up to about Mach.2, so 20% of the speed of sound. Typically, 20% of the speed of sound. Typically, 20% of the speed of sound. Typically, this wind tunnel is used in the this wind tunnel is used in the this wind tunnel is used in the development of advanced wing geometries development of advanced wing geometries development of advanced wing geometries for innovative sustainable aircraft for innovative sustainable aircraft for innovative sustainable aircraft design. But today, it's being used for design. But today, it's being used for design. But today, it's being used for football. We have just a Sting mount football. We have just a Sting mount football. We have just a Sting mount mounted to a turntable. We actually have mounted to a turntable. We actually have mounted to a turntable. We actually have a six component load cell here. And with a six component load cell here. And with a six component load cell here. And with this six component load cell, we can this six component load cell, we can this six component load cell, we can measure all three components of force measure all three components of force measure all three components of force and torque. We then have an electric and torque. We then have an electric and torque. We then have an electric motor, right, that we can spin to motor, right, that we can spin to motor, right, that we can spin to basically simulate the spiral. First, basically simulate the spiral. First, basically simulate the spiral. First, we're going to simulate one of Brady's we're going to simulate one of Brady's we're going to simulate one of Brady's throws where the ball travels straight throws where the ball travels straight throws where the ball travels straight into the airflow with his classic into the airflow with his classic into the airflow with his classic spiral. And everything proceeds as we spiral. And everything proceeds as we spiral. And everything proceeds as we expect. No significant forces or torques expect. No significant forces or torques expect. No significant forces or torques develop. But during a game, a ball develop. But during a game, a ball develop. But during a game, a ball doesn't travel like this in a straight doesn't travel like this in a straight doesn't travel like this in a straight line. During any throw, its center of line. During any throw, its center of line. During any throw, its center of mass follows a roughly parabolic mass follows a roughly parabolic mass follows a roughly parabolic trajectory. So, let's say you align the trajectory. So, let's say you align the trajectory. So, let's say you align the ball perfectly with this parabola when ball perfectly with this parabola when ball perfectly with this parabola when you launch it. Well, then from the you launch it. Well, then from the you launch it. Well, then from the ball's perspective, just a moment later, ball's perspective, just a moment later, ball's perspective, just a moment later, this parabola starts to curve down away this parabola starts to curve down away this parabola starts to curve down away from the ball, which means more air will from the ball, which means more air will from the ball, which means more air will be hitting the underside of the ball be hitting the underside of the ball be hitting the underside of the ball than on top. Now, you would expect this than on top. Now, you would expect this than on top. Now, you would expect this would tilt the ball back, but that's would tilt the ball back, but that's would tilt the ball back, but that's only what happens if the ball is not only what happens if the ball is not only what happens if the ball is not spinning. If it is spinning, then the spinning. If it is spinning, then the spinning. If it is spinning, then the situation is very different, which you situation is very different, which you situation is very different, which you can see with this amazing demo. Imagine can see with this amazing demo. Imagine can see with this amazing demo. Imagine this ring of golf balls is like a this ring of golf balls is like a this ring of golf balls is like a cross-sectional slice of the football. cross-sectional slice of the football. cross-sectional slice of the football. Here's what happens when I try and push Here's what happens when I try and push Here's what happens when I try and push it back with this leaf it back with this leaf it back with this leaf blower. I mean, it tilts back just like blower. I mean, it tilts back just like blower. I mean, it tilts back just like you'd expect. But if I do the exact same you'd expect. But if I do the exact same you'd expect. But if I do the exact same thing, but this time get the wheel spinning, tilts out to the right. And spinning, tilts out to the right. And spinning, tilts out to the right. And you can see why if we slow it down. So you can see why if we slow it down. So you can see why if we slow it down. So as the ring passes the leaf bar, that's as the ring passes the leaf bar, that's as the ring passes the leaf bar, that's where the force is applied. But each where the force is applied. But each where the force is applied. But each ball still has momentum in the direction ball still has momentum in the direction ball still has momentum in the direction of rotation. So it actually reaches its of rotation. So it actually reaches its of rotation. So it actually reaches its peak 90° further along from where the peak 90° further along from where the peak 90° further along from where the force is applied. And this is known as force is applied. And this is known as force is applied. And this is known as gyroscopic procession. gyroscopic procession. gyroscopic procession. So if the wind was hitting it, it's So if the wind was hitting it, it's So if the wind was hitting it, it's going to keep the point up. So you'd going to keep the point up. So you'd going to keep the point up. So you'd think that it would just push it back. think that it would just push it back. think that it would just push it back. But because it's spinning, when you push But because it's spinning, when you push But because it's spinning, when you push up, it actually tilts to the right. Oh, up, it actually tilts to the right. Oh, up, it actually tilts to the right. Oh, interesting. But it doesn't stop there. interesting. But it doesn't stop there. interesting. But it doesn't stop there. As the ball tilts right, it exposes more As the ball tilts right, it exposes more As the ball tilts right, it exposes more area on that side. So now, because of area on that side. So now, because of area on that side. So now, because of gyroscopic procession, the ball pitches gyroscopic procession, the ball pitches gyroscopic procession, the ball pitches downward. And with more air hitting the downward. And with more air hitting the downward. And with more air hitting the top of the ball, well, it's going to top of the ball, well, it's going to top of the ball, well, it's going to deflect to the left. And that is going deflect to the left. And that is going deflect to the left. And that is going to make the ball deflect back up. And to make the ball deflect back up. And to make the ball deflect back up. And now we're back to where we started. So now we're back to where we started. So now we're back to where we started. So this cycle is going to repeat. And since this cycle is going to repeat. And since this cycle is going to repeat. And since this is happening continuously, the nose this is happening continuously, the nose this is happening continuously, the nose traces out a circle around the direction traces out a circle around the direction traces out a circle around the direction of air flow. So we get a slow wobble. We of air flow. So we get a slow wobble. We of air flow. So we get a slow wobble. We used to joke whenever you would not used to joke whenever you would not used to joke whenever you would not throw a tight spiral, you would call it throw a tight spiral, you would call it throw a tight spiral, you would call it a tight wobbler. That was a Brett Favre a tight wobbler. That was a Brett Favre a tight wobbler. That was a Brett Favre coin phrase. He let it go and have a coin phrase. He let it go and have a coin phrase. He let it go and have a little wobble to it and he go, "Oh, little wobble to it and he go, "Oh, little wobble to it and he go, "Oh, tight wobbler." tight wobbler." tight wobbler." Now, if the ball were just traveling Now, if the ball were just traveling Now, if the ball were just traveling straight, this would be the whole story. straight, this would be the whole story. straight, this would be the whole story. But remember from before, the ball's But remember from before, the ball's But remember from before, the ball's path is a parabola. Meaning that from path is a parabola. Meaning that from path is a parabola. Meaning that from the ball's perspective, the oncoming air the ball's perspective, the oncoming air the ball's perspective, the oncoming air is constantly dipping down away from it. is constantly dipping down away from it. is constantly dipping down away from it. So the ball is trying to process around So the ball is trying to process around So the ball is trying to process around the airflow direction, but that the airflow direction, but that the airflow direction, but that direction is constantly direction is constantly direction is constantly changing. For example, by the time the changing. For example, by the time the changing. For example, by the time the ball has reached the bottom of the ball has reached the bottom of the ball has reached the bottom of the procession, the airflow has moved down procession, the airflow has moved down procession, the airflow has moved down too. And what that means is the ball is too. And what that means is the ball is too. And what that means is the ball is not going to tilt out to the left as not going to tilt out to the left as not going to tilt out to the left as much as you'd expect. So when it much as you'd expect. So when it much as you'd expect. So when it processes back up, it doesn't go as high processes back up, it doesn't go as high processes back up, it doesn't go as high as where it started. And over time, it as where it started. And over time, it as where it started. And over time, it is this that gradually pitches the nose is this that gradually pitches the nose is this that gradually pitches the nose of the football down, keeping it aligned of the football down, keeping it aligned of the football down, keeping it aligned with its parabolic path. I can visualize it all. Your fancy path. I can visualize it all. Your fancy path. I can visualize it all. Your fancy science words. I I'm going all the way science words. I I'm going all the way science words. I I'm going all the way back to my high school days. I was a back to my high school days. I was a back to my high school days. I was a very average science student. So, but very average science student. So, but very average science student. So, but you're you're teaching me a lot. As the you're you're teaching me a lot. As the you're you're teaching me a lot. As the ball goes through the air, there's going ball goes through the air, there's going ball goes through the air, there's going to be more air resistance on the bottom to be more air resistance on the bottom to be more air resistance on the bottom of the ball than on the top. The front of the ball than on the top. The front of the ball than on the top. The front of the ball, not the back, because of the ball, not the back, because of the ball, not the back, because that's hitting the wind first. The front that's hitting the wind first. The front that's hitting the wind first. The front bottom of the ball. Okay? And so what bottom of the ball. Okay? And so what bottom of the ball. Okay? And so what that means is it creates this processive that means is it creates this processive that means is it creates this processive effect that pushes it out, push it down, effect that pushes it out, push it down, effect that pushes it out, push it down, push it right. It creates a wobble no push it right. It creates a wobble no push it right. It creates a wobble no matter what you do. So wobble is matter what you do. So wobble is matter what you do. So wobble is actually not only impossible to avoid, actually not only impossible to avoid, actually not only impossible to avoid, but it's essential to make sure that the but it's essential to make sure that the but it's essential to make sure that the ball follows the path that you want it ball follows the path that you want it ball follows the path that you want it to follow. You can see this in the wind to follow. You can see this in the wind to follow. You can see this in the wind tunnel. We've tilted the ball up by 3° tunnel. We've tilted the ball up by 3° tunnel. We've tilted the ball up by 3° and it's free to pivot in any direction. and it's free to pivot in any direction. and it's free to pivot in any direction. Yeah, you're definitely seeing a pitch. Yeah, you're definitely seeing a pitch. Yeah, you're definitely seeing a pitch. Oh, that's awesome. What we're seeing is Oh, that's awesome. What we're seeing is Oh, that's awesome. What we're seeing is it's starting out aligning itself about it's starting out aligning itself about it's starting out aligning itself about 3° off, you know, cuz that's how we spin 3° off, you know, cuz that's how we spin 3° off, you know, cuz that's how we spin it up. But as the air flow starts, it's it up. But as the air flow starts, it's it up. But as the air flow starts, it's pointing itself in the direction that pointing itself in the direction that pointing itself in the direction that minimizes drag. That's so cool. I mean, minimizes drag. That's so cool. I mean, minimizes drag. That's so cool. I mean, that's exactly what we were expecting. that's exactly what we were expecting. that's exactly what we were expecting. But it's still incredible to see it in But it's still incredible to see it in But it's still incredible to see it in person. If you look at a real football person. If you look at a real football person. If you look at a real football in flight, you'll notice that it spends in flight, you'll notice that it spends in flight, you'll notice that it spends more time angled slightly to the right more time angled slightly to the right more time angled slightly to the right when thrown by a right-hander. That is when thrown by a right-hander. That is when thrown by a right-hander. That is what creates the force which through what creates the force which through what creates the force which through procession gradually pitches the nose procession gradually pitches the nose procession gradually pitches the nose downward. It creates the turnover effect downward. It creates the turnover effect downward. It creates the turnover effect that Tom Brady was talking about. Just that Tom Brady was talking about. Just that Tom Brady was talking about. Just want to reframe the wobble is not want to reframe the wobble is not want to reframe the wobble is not necessarily a bad thing. Okay, good. necessarily a bad thing. Okay, good. necessarily a bad thing. Okay, good. Manny had a good wobble on the balls, Manny had a good wobble on the balls, Manny had a good wobble on the balls, but he found a way to complete a lot of but he found a way to complete a lot of but he found a way to complete a lot of touchdowns that way. But the rightward touchdowns that way. But the rightward touchdowns that way. But the rightward lean of the ball also has an unintended lean of the ball also has an unintended lean of the ball also has an unintended side effect. side effect. side effect. Something we've heard is that for Something we've heard is that for Something we've heard is that for right-handed throwers, the ball will right-handed throwers, the ball will right-handed throwers, the ball will drift right and for left-handed drift right and for left-handed drift right and for left-handed throwers, the ball will drift left. Do throwers, the ball will drift left. Do throwers, the ball will drift left. Do you think that's true or is is that you think that's true or is is that you think that's true or is is that something you notice? So, I wouldn't something you notice? So, I wouldn't something you notice? So, I wouldn't necessarily agree with that. So, we got necessarily agree with that. So, we got necessarily agree with that. So, we got Tom to throw straight down one of the Tom to throw straight down one of the Tom to throw straight down one of the lines on the field. Is a drone set? lines on the field. Is a drone set? lines on the field. Is a drone set? That's a pretty straight throw. Henry, That's a pretty straight throw. Henry, That's a pretty straight throw. Henry, don't move. You're making it look bad. don't move. You're making it look bad. don't move. You're making it look bad. I'll stay I'll stay planted. The more I'll stay I'll stay planted. The more I'll stay I'll stay planted. The more still you you go, the better it looks still you you go, the better it looks still you you go, the better it looks for my throw. It's like a catcher when for my throw. It's like a catcher when for my throw. It's like a catcher when you frame the pitch. I'll frame it. I'll you frame the pitch. I'll frame it. I'll you frame the pitch. I'll frame it. I'll frame it. From ground level, his passes frame it. From ground level, his passes frame it. From ground level, his passes looked amazingly straight. But from the looked amazingly straight. But from the looked amazingly straight. But from the drone, if you watch closely, just at the drone, if you watch closely, just at the drone, if you watch closely, just at the end of the pass, the ball does drift off end of the pass, the ball does drift off end of the pass, the ball does drift off to the right. This is because up until to the right. This is because up until to the right. This is because up until now, we've been ignoring a very now, we've been ignoring a very now, we've been ignoring a very important aerodynamic effect, which is important aerodynamic effect, which is important aerodynamic effect, which is lift. When the ball is tilted to the lift. When the ball is tilted to the lift. When the ball is tilted to the right, it generates lift out in that right, it generates lift out in that right, it generates lift out in that direction. The more it's tilted, the direction. The more it's tilted, the direction. The more it's tilted, the larger this force is, the rightward tilt larger this force is, the rightward tilt larger this force is, the rightward tilt is required to get the ball to turn over is required to get the ball to turn over is required to get the ball to turn over during its parabolic path, but it does during its parabolic path, but it does during its parabolic path, but it does mean that right-handed throws tend to mean that right-handed throws tend to mean that right-handed throws tend to drift right. The effect is subtle, but drift right. The effect is subtle, but drift right. The effect is subtle, but some players notice it intuitively. In some players notice it intuitively. In some players notice it intuitively. In the fall of 1991, Jerry Rice, generally the fall of 1991, Jerry Rice, generally the fall of 1991, Jerry Rice, generally considered the greatest wide receiver of considered the greatest wide receiver of considered the greatest wide receiver of all time, changed quarterbacks. In place all time, changed quarterbacks. In place all time, changed quarterbacks. In place of the right-handed Joe Montana, he was of the right-handed Joe Montana, he was of the right-handed Joe Montana, he was now catching passes from the left-handed now catching passes from the left-handed now catching passes from the left-handed Steve Young. And for Rice, something Steve Young. And for Rice, something Steve Young. And for Rice, something felt off. He wasn't sure exactly why, felt off. He wasn't sure exactly why, felt off. He wasn't sure exactly why, but he said the throws were coming up but he said the throws were coming up but he said the throws were coming up short. Of course, what was actually short. Of course, what was actually short. Of course, what was actually happening was that the ball was drifting happening was that the ball was drifting happening was that the ball was drifting away from where he expected it to be. away from where he expected it to be. away from where he expected it to be. Joe Montana's right-handed throws Joe Montana's right-handed throws Joe Montana's right-handed throws drifted to the right, whereas Steve drifted to the right, whereas Steve drifted to the right, whereas Steve Young's drifted left. It's a subtle Young's drifted left. It's a subtle Young's drifted left. It's a subtle effect, but it's all part of the effect, but it's all part of the effect, but it's all part of the procession that minimizes drag on the procession that minimizes drag on the procession that minimizes drag on the ball and lets it fly farther, faster, ball and lets it fly farther, faster, ball and lets it fly farther, faster, and more and more and more accurately. So, it's not because you're accurately. So, it's not because you're accurately. So, it's not because you're a bad quarterback throwing it with a a bad quarterback throwing it with a a bad quarterback throwing it with a wobble. It's because wind, you know. wobble. It's because wind, you know. wobble. It's because wind, you know. Okay. So, what if you're in a dome and Okay. So, what if you're in a dome and Okay. So, what if you're in a dome and there's no wind? See, that's a great there's no wind? See, that's a great there's no wind? See, that's a great question. So, I'm just saying this is question. So, I'm just saying this is question. So, I'm just saying this is just air resistance. So, even in even in just air resistance. So, even in even in just air resistance. So, even in even in a dome, the same thing would happen. a dome, the same thing would happen. a dome, the same thing would happen. Whether in an outdoor stadium or a Whether in an outdoor stadium or a Whether in an outdoor stadium or a closed top dome, the ball will always closed top dome, the ball will always closed top dome, the ball will always wobble. But outdoor stadiums are wobble. But outdoor stadiums are wobble. But outdoor stadiums are significantly harder to throw in because significantly harder to throw in because significantly harder to throw in because of the wind. With the ball being thrown of the wind. With the ball being thrown of the wind. With the ball being thrown at 50 to 60 mph, most of the air flow at 50 to 60 mph, most of the air flow at 50 to 60 mph, most of the air flow over the ball is due to its own motion. over the ball is due to its own motion. over the ball is due to its own motion. But in winds gusting over 15 mph, the But in winds gusting over 15 mph, the But in winds gusting over 15 mph, the weather starts to play a major role. We weather starts to play a major role. We weather starts to play a major role. We commissioned the NFL data team to do an commissioned the NFL data team to do an commissioned the NFL data team to do an analysis of completion percentage in analysis of completion percentage in analysis of completion percentage in outdoor stadiums versus indoor domes. outdoor stadiums versus indoor domes. outdoor stadiums versus indoor domes. And they found that throws in indoor And they found that throws in indoor And they found that throws in indoor stadiums are consistently more accurate stadiums are consistently more accurate stadiums are consistently more accurate no matter the distance. So maybe Brady no matter the distance. So maybe Brady no matter the distance. So maybe Brady was hardone by Foxboro, New England's was hardone by Foxboro, New England's was hardone by Foxboro, New England's stadium. Do you prefer to throw in a stadium. Do you prefer to throw in a stadium. Do you prefer to throw in a game when it's no wind? Do you prefer game when it's no wind? Do you prefer game when it's no wind? Do you prefer wind, rain, snow? Does it matter? wind, rain, snow? Does it matter? wind, rain, snow? Does it matter? I preferred I preferred I preferred outdoor, 70°, humid, tiny little breeze outdoor, 70°, humid, tiny little breeze outdoor, 70°, humid, tiny little breeze just to keep you cool. Right. But why just to keep you cool. Right. But why just to keep you cool. Right. But why did you like being outdoors as opposed did you like being outdoors as opposed did you like being outdoors as opposed to being in a dome? I felt like my depth to being in a dome? I felt like my depth to being in a dome? I felt like my depth perception was a little better outside. perception was a little better outside. perception was a little better outside. Um, I like just the natural feel of the Um, I like just the natural feel of the Um, I like just the natural feel of the natural air. The dome always felt um natural air. The dome always felt um natural air. The dome always felt um like a vacuum. Do you think you had an like a vacuum. Do you think you had an like a vacuum. Do you think you had an edge if the weather was bad compared to edge if the weather was bad compared to edge if the weather was bad compared to other quarterbacks? other quarterbacks? other quarterbacks? Um, I would say yes. And the reason why Um, I would say yes. And the reason why Um, I would say yes. And the reason why is I'd say I practiced in it all the is I'd say I practiced in it all the is I'd say I practiced in it all the time. And I think um getting used to the time. And I think um getting used to the time. And I think um getting used to the conditions and the familiarity of the conditions and the familiarity of the conditions and the familiarity of the wind, of the humidity, of the rain, of wind, of the humidity, of the rain, of wind, of the humidity, of the rain, of the snow, you know, grass field, turf the snow, you know, grass field, turf the snow, you know, grass field, turf field. I knew exactly what to wear for field. I knew exactly what to wear for field. I knew exactly what to wear for every single condition. I played 23 every single condition. I played 23 every single condition. I played 23 seasons, 100 to 120 practices a year. So seasons, 100 to 120 practices a year. So seasons, 100 to 120 practices a year. So that's over two 2,000 plus practices. that's over two 2,000 plus practices. that's over two 2,000 plus practices. That's crazy. You know the thickness you That's crazy. You know the thickness you That's crazy. You know the thickness you want in your sleeves. You go, "Okay, want in your sleeves. You go, "Okay, want in your sleeves. You go, "Okay, what's temperature?" It's 50°. Okay, what's temperature?" It's 50°. Okay, what's temperature?" It's 50°. Okay, this is the shirt I wear when it's 50°. this is the shirt I wear when it's 50°. this is the shirt I wear when it's 50°. Oh, it's 35°. This is the two shirts I Oh, it's 35°. This is the two shirts I Oh, it's 35°. This is the two shirts I wear when it's 35°. You know, this is wear when it's 35°. You know, this is wear when it's 35°. You know, this is the muff that I wear. You know, this is the muff that I wear. You know, this is the muff that I wear. You know, this is how many heat packs I put in the muff to how many heat packs I put in the muff to how many heat packs I put in the muff to keep my hand warm when it's 30° versus keep my hand warm when it's 30° versus keep my hand warm when it's 30° versus 50°. You had it all dialed in. You just 50°. You had it all dialed in. You just 50°. You had it all dialed in. You just have to I mean, you just observe over have to I mean, you just observe over have to I mean, you just observe over time and you, you know, get better and time and you, you know, get better and time and you, you know, get better and better. It's a lot like an F1 car, you better. It's a lot like an F1 car, you better. It's a lot like an F1 car, you know? Everything is just fractions of, know? Everything is just fractions of, know? Everything is just fractions of, you know, things to do to make yourself you know, things to do to make yourself you know, things to do to make yourself feel the most comfortable. feel the most comfortable. feel the most comfortable. So maybe Brady is a bit more scientific So maybe Brady is a bit more scientific So maybe Brady is a bit more scientific than he gives himself credit for. Over than he gives himself credit for. Over than he gives himself credit for. Over 383 career games, more than 7,700 383 career games, more than 7,700 383 career games, more than 7,700 completed passes, and tens of thousands completed passes, and tens of thousands completed passes, and tens of thousands of hours on the field, Brady intuitively of hours on the field, Brady intuitively of hours on the field, Brady intuitively understands all the physics we've just understands all the physics we've just understands all the physics we've just analyzed. Plus, he knows how to harness analyzed. Plus, he knows how to harness analyzed. Plus, he knows how to harness these effects to get the ball where he these effects to get the ball where he these effects to get the ball where he wants it to go with just a few seconds wants it to go with just a few seconds wants it to go with just a few seconds to throw it. In a game where perfection to throw it. In a game where perfection to throw it. In a game where perfection is impossible, he's internalized all the is impossible, he's internalized all the is impossible, he's internalized all the complex physics, the kinematics, the complex physics, the kinematics, the complex physics, the kinematics, the aerodynamics, and he still makes it look aerodynamics, and he still makes it look aerodynamics, and he still makes it look simple. simple. simple. Yeah, I don't have to move. Yeah, I don't have to move. Yeah, I don't have to move. So, we actually made a video together So, we actually made a video together So, we actually made a video together with Tom Brady teaching us how to throw with Tom Brady teaching us how to throw with Tom Brady teaching us how to throw a football. And if you want to learn a football. And if you want to learn a football. And if you want to learn more about that, you can check it out more about that, you can check it out more about that, you can check it out right here. right here. right here. Now, what we got for you are some balls Now, what we got for you are some balls Now, what we got for you are some balls that you've never thrown before. Oh god, that you've never thrown before. Oh god, that you've never thrown before. Oh god, what do you guys got cooked up? But what do you guys got cooked up? But what do you guys got cooked up? But we're not done yet. What the heck? we're not done yet. What the heck? we're not done yet. What the heck? In other sports, surfaces are engineered In other sports, surfaces are engineered In other sports, surfaces are engineered down to the smallest detail to control down to the smallest detail to control down to the smallest detail to control air flow. But footballs, they've hardly air flow. But footballs, they've hardly air flow. But footballs, they've hardly changed in decades. So, we tested changed in decades. So, we tested changed in decades. So, we tested whether a football's design is really whether a football's design is really whether a football's design is really optimal. And to find out, we had Tom optimal. And to find out, we had Tom optimal. And to find out, we had Tom Brady throw a series of custom balls, Brady throw a series of custom balls, Brady throw a series of custom balls, including one built to eliminate his including one built to eliminate his including one built to eliminate his spin entirely. I didn't even know how spin entirely. I didn't even know how spin entirely. I didn't even know how you could throw that. Now, in you could throw that. Now, in you could throw that. Now, in investigating this, we actually investigating this, we actually investigating this, we actually uncovered a secret technique that teams uncovered a secret technique that teams uncovered a secret technique that teams are using to modify their balls and give are using to modify their balls and give are using to modify their balls and give their players an advantage. But, we'll their players an advantage. But, we'll their players an advantage. But, we'll get to that in a future video. So, make get to that in a future video. So, make get to that in a future video. So, make sure to subscribe and stay notified and sure to subscribe and stay notified and sure to subscribe and stay notified and we'll see you then. That's insane.