Title: The First Meeting of EDUtubers! ft. CGPGrey, Vsauce, Smarter Every Day, Numberphile +more
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SnrdqCQuwK8

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Hey, Veritasium! Michael [Stevens] from Vsauce here, and we're gonna ask some important questions. Let's find some random bystanders...how about you? Yes? Michael: I don't believe you're scientifically literate. Okay. Michael: If a tomato is a fruit, does that mean ketchup is a smoothie? John Green: So, can you name any of the cities in the Indus Valley civilization? Are we talking about, like, Cairo? John: (scoffs) Yeah, Cairo would not qualify as one of the cities in the Indus Valley civilisation. John: Cairo!...Cairo! This is Brady Haran from Periodic Videos, and Sixty Symbols, and bibledex, and DeepSkyVideos, and Numberphile, and nottinghamscience, and foodskey, and-- Alright, and I'm Derek from Veritasium. and foodskey, and-- Alright, and I'm Derek from Veritasium. Brady: Wait, you only got one channel? I know! Brady: You call yourself a Youtuber? Vi Hart, uh, you want to ask me a question? Vi: Triangle. Um, that's not a question? Vi: Triangle. (laughs awkwardly) Uh...ah-um... John: In what year did the French Revolution began? 17...72? John: You had the--the first two numbers were awesome! (Derek chuckles) Brady: We have a Veritasium exclusive right now. We're gonna show you the first, unauthorized picture of CGP Grey, who's standing here right next to me. Here's a question for--oh. Hang on. He was here a minute ago. Henry Reich: Okay, so what I was thinking I might have you, uh, try to calculate here is some Feynman diagrams in curved spacetime. But to start off with something a bit easier, uh, I think we should start off with the Christoffel symbol for the Schwartzchild metric. Um, and in case you've forgotten I've written it, I've even written the metric here-- Derek: No, I know it--I know what it is. I don't need you to show me. Henry: Okay. Derek: No, I know it--I know what it is. I don't need you to show me. Henry: So like-- Derek: No, I know it--I know what it is. I don't need you to show me. Henry: I know. Henry: You have something on your face. Vi: Triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle, triangle. Vi: Triangle, triangle, triangle... I am actually quite concerned about what you're doing to my face. Vi: (laughs) TRIANGLE! I am actually quite concerned about what you're doing to my face. Right, so this is CGP Grey and Veritasium at the BrainSTEM Conference here in Canada and it's been a great couple of days. You gonna come visit me Derek? Definitely! I've always wanted to visit Great Britain. (CGP Grey sighs) I mean...the United Kingdom? England? Derek: The British Isles? CGP Grey: Great. CGP Grey: Great, yeah. I look forward to it. Going through U.S. customs in, like, an hour. (Vi laughs) I was expecting, like, 𝘢 triangle, but this is feeling like lots of triangles. Vi: Well, they--they're happier in groups. Right. Vi: Like, they're like sheep. They get sad and lonely by themselves. Destin Sandlin: So, we're in the Corolla. I don't--I just met these guys. Henry: Look, look, there's like the Mennonite farms out there. If this car crashes right now, like, all of science on YouTube is going down. (everyone laughs)