Title: Transit of Venus! Sydney 2012 Contacts, Contracts and Parallax
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=og1CzUmnSlE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Now, there are very few things that will Now, there are very few things that will Now, there are very few things that will get me out of bed in the morning before get me out of bed in the morning before get me out of bed in the morning before 8:00, but the transit of Venus is one of 8:00, but the transit of Venus is one of 8:00, but the transit of Venus is one of them because this is the last time it's them because this is the last time it's them because this is the last time it's going to happen in my lifetime. So, I going to happen in my lifetime. So, I going to happen in my lifetime. So, I don't have to worry about this becoming don't have to worry about this becoming don't have to worry about this becoming a regular thing. On my way to see the a regular thing. On my way to see the a regular thing. On my way to see the transit of Venus. transit of Venus. transit of Venus. Okay, so the transit is probably Okay, so the transit is probably Okay, so the transit is probably starting right now. This is probably starting right now. This is probably starting right now. This is probably contact one. It's 8:16 a.m. in Sydney. contact one. It's 8:16 a.m. in Sydney. contact one. It's 8:16 a.m. in Sydney. My first look in it. Yeah. My first look in it. Yeah. My first look in it. Yeah. Oh, wow. [music] [music] [music] Can you see it? [music] Can you see it? [music] Can you see it? [music] Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. You can't see it? You can't see it? You can't see it? Nope. Nope. Nope. It's like a black dot. It's like a black dot. It's like a black dot. That's Venus. It's That's Venus. It's That's Venus. It's beautiful. The sun is now out and uh beautiful. The sun is now out and uh beautiful. The sun is now out and uh with these silly glasses, you can with these silly glasses, you can with these silly glasses, you can actually see Venus on the sun. actually see Venus on the sun. actually see Venus on the sun. Nowadays, I imagine most people don't Nowadays, I imagine most people don't Nowadays, I imagine most people don't get excited about Venus passing [music] get excited about Venus passing [music] get excited about Venus passing [music] in front of the sun. I mean, what's the in front of the sun. I mean, what's the in front of the sun. I mean, what's the big deal? But in the old days, it was a big deal? But in the old days, it was a big deal? But in the old days, it was a really important event because it really important event because it really important event because it allowed us to determine the scale of our allowed us to determine the scale of our allowed us to determine the scale of our solar system and then the scale of the solar system and then the scale of the solar system and then the scale of the universe. Astronomers at the time knew universe. Astronomers at the time knew universe. Astronomers at the time knew the relative distances between the the relative distances between the the relative distances between the planets. Because of Kepler's laws, they planets. Because of Kepler's laws, they planets. Because of Kepler's laws, they could calculate the ratios of the could calculate the ratios of the could calculate the ratios of the different radi of the orbits of planets. different radi of the orbits of planets. different radi of the orbits of planets. But unfortunately, they didn't have any But unfortunately, they didn't have any But unfortunately, they didn't have any absolute measure. So, they couldn't absolute measure. So, they couldn't absolute measure. So, they couldn't really say how far anything was from really say how far anything was from really say how far anything was from anything else. Edmund Haley, the guy who anything else. Edmund Haley, the guy who anything else. Edmund Haley, the guy who the comet's named after, was the one who the comet's named after, was the one who the comet's named after, was the one who suggested that by timing how long it suggested that by timing how long it suggested that by timing how long it takes Venus to pass across the face of takes Venus to pass across the face of takes Venus to pass across the face of the sun from different points on the the sun from different points on the the sun from different points on the Earth would allow us to measure the Earth would allow us to measure the Earth would allow us to measure the distance between the Earth and the Sun. distance between the Earth and the Sun. distance between the Earth and the Sun. That's using something called parallax. That's using something called parallax. That's using something called parallax. Now, to illustrate parallax, I've Now, to illustrate parallax, I've Now, to illustrate parallax, I've actually kind of set up a solar system actually kind of set up a solar system actually kind of set up a solar system in my kitchen and living room. So, you in my kitchen and living room. So, you in my kitchen and living room. So, you can see the sun there behind me. Uh, can see the sun there behind me. Uh, can see the sun there behind me. Uh, this is Venus [music] this is Venus [music] this is Venus [music] and over here we have the Earth. and over here we have the Earth. and over here we have the Earth. Oh, sorry guys. Uh, I got to take this. Oh, sorry guys. Uh, I got to take this. Oh, sorry guys. Uh, I got to take this. It's Destin from Smarter Every Day. It's Destin from Smarter Every Day. It's Destin from Smarter Every Day. Hey Derek, you there? Hey Derek, you there? Hey Derek, you there? Yo, what's going on? Yo, what's going on? Yo, what's going on? Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, man. I went Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, man. I went Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, man. I went up to the Space and Rocket Center. We up to the Space and Rocket Center. We up to the Space and Rocket Center. We got the times. You said we could got the times. You said we could got the times. You said we could calculate the distance to the sun, calculate the distance to the sun, calculate the distance to the sun, right? right? right? Uh, yeah. Because we're on opposite Uh, yeah. Because we're on opposite Uh, yeah. Because we're on opposite sides of the globe, we're going to sides of the globe, we're going to sides of the globe, we're going to compare times and calculate the distance compare times and calculate the distance compare times and calculate the distance to the sun. Uh, my time was uh 6 hours to the sun. Uh, my time was uh 6 hours to the sun. Uh, my time was uh 6 hours 28 minutes and 4 seconds in Sydney. 28 minutes and 4 seconds in Sydney. 28 minutes and 4 seconds in Sydney. Okay. Okay. Okay. What time did you get? What time did you get? What time did you get? 62804, right? 62804, right? 62804, right? 62804. That's me. 62804. That's me. 62804. That's me. Okay. Mine was 6 hours 45 minutes and 36 Okay. Mine was 6 hours 45 minutes and 36 Okay. Mine was 6 hours 45 minutes and 36 seconds. seconds. seconds. Oh, a bit longer. Oh, a bit longer. Oh, a bit longer. All right. So, do I I just go put it in All right. So, do I I just go put it in All right. So, do I I just go put it in that calculator website you gave me? that calculator website you gave me? that calculator website you gave me? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do that. Okay. All right. Sounds good. And me Okay. All right. Sounds good. And me Okay. All right. Sounds good. And me just call you back afterwards. just call you back afterwards. just call you back afterwards. Sounds good. All right. Talk to you Sounds good. All right. Talk to you Sounds good. All right. Talk to you later. Bye. later. Bye. later. Bye. So, the plan is I'm going to shoot from So, the plan is I'm going to shoot from So, the plan is I'm going to shoot from the Earth, from the top [music] of the the Earth, from the top [music] of the the Earth, from the top [music] of the Earth, and see what it looks like when I Earth, and see what it looks like when I Earth, and see what it looks like when I make a transit of Venus across the face make a transit of Venus across the face make a transit of Venus across the face of the Sun. And then I'm going to change of the Sun. And then I'm going to change of the Sun. And then I'm going to change my perspective slightly. So, I'm going my perspective slightly. So, I'm going my perspective slightly. So, I'm going to go to a lower part of the Earth, and to go to a lower part of the Earth, and to go to a lower part of the Earth, and I'm going to shoot the same [music] I'm going to shoot the same [music] I'm going to shoot the same [music] thing. And then I want to overlay those thing. And then I want to overlay those thing. And then I want to overlay those two images to see how Venus looks as two images to see how Venus looks as two images to see how Venus looks as [music] it's tracking across the Sun [music] it's tracking across the Sun [music] it's tracking across the Sun from those two different locations. It from those two different locations. It from those two different locations. It should trace out two separate cords should trace out two separate cords should trace out two separate cords across the face of the sun. And that is across the face of the sun. And that is across the face of the sun. And that is what allows us to estimate [music] the what allows us to estimate [music] the what allows us to estimate [music] the distance to Venus and the distance to distance to Venus and the distance to distance to Venus and the distance to the sun and everything else in the solar the sun and everything else in the solar the sun and everything else in the solar system because once we have one absolute system because once we have one absolute system because once we have one absolute distance, [music] we can get all of the distance, [music] we can get all of the distance, [music] we can get all of the distances. So 243 years ago, Captain distances. So 243 years ago, Captain distances. So 243 years ago, Captain Cook was down here sent to Tahiti to Cook was down here sent to Tahiti to Cook was down here sent to Tahiti to observe the transit of Venus. observe the transit of Venus. observe the transit of Venus. And after that, he opened his sealed And after that, he opened his sealed And after that, he opened his sealed papers with his secret mission. He was papers with his secret mission. He was papers with his secret mission. He was meant to find the great southern land meant to find the great southern land meant to find the great southern land and claim it for Britain, which is what and claim it for Britain, which is what and claim it for Britain, which is what he did. He uh mapped and explore the he did. He uh mapped and explore the he did. He uh mapped and explore the coasts of New Zealand and Australia coasts of New Zealand and Australia coasts of New Zealand and Australia before returning home. This was his before returning home. This was his before returning home. This was his first voyage to the South Pacific. So, first voyage to the South Pacific. So, first voyage to the South Pacific. So, um pretty exciting. And then in I guess um pretty exciting. And then in I guess um pretty exciting. And then in I guess kind of a related note, 8 years ago when kind of a related note, 8 years ago when kind of a related note, 8 years ago when this transit was taking place, I was this transit was taking place, I was this transit was taking place, I was actually in the air over the Pacific actually in the air over the Pacific actually in the air over the Pacific flying from Vancouver to Sydney to uh flying from Vancouver to Sydney to uh flying from Vancouver to Sydney to uh make my life here. So, you know, me and make my life here. So, you know, me and make my life here. So, you know, me and Cook, we got something in common, I Cook, we got something in common, I Cook, we got something in common, I guess. You know, guess. You know, guess. You know, it's Dustin calling back with the it's Dustin calling back with the it's Dustin calling back with the distance. [music] distance. [music] distance. [music] What's going on, Dustin? What's going on, Dustin? What's going on, Dustin? Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, I got it. I Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, I got it. I Hey, what's up, dude? Hey, I got it. I am Woke. It is like It's like 2:00 in am Woke. It is like It's like 2:00 in am Woke. It is like It's like 2:00 in the morning here or something. Anyway, the morning here or something. Anyway, the morning here or something. Anyway, it's uh 93 million miles. it's uh 93 million miles. it's uh 93 million miles. 93 million? No, I I don't think that's a 93 million? No, I I don't think that's a 93 million? No, I I don't think that's a unit. Is it miles? They got rid of that unit. Is it miles? They got rid of that unit. Is it miles? They got rid of that like 100 years ago. like 100 years ago. like 100 years ago. Used to put man on the moon. Used to put man on the moon. Used to put man on the moon. Wow. Wow. Wow. Inches. That's That's awesome. You want Inches. That's That's awesome. You want Inches. That's That's awesome. You want in kilometers? in kilometers? in kilometers? I want in kilometers. How far is it? I want in kilometers. How far is it? I want in kilometers. How far is it? Uh it's about 149 and a half and some Uh it's about 149 and a half and some Uh it's about 149 and a half and some change uh million kilometers. [music] So change uh million kilometers. [music] So change uh million kilometers. [music] So that's awesome. That's like bang on. that's awesome. That's like bang on. that's awesome. That's like bang on. Oh, is it? Oh, is it? Oh, is it? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Is that astronomical unit? Is that astronomical unit? Is that astronomical unit? That is one astronomical unit. So good That is one astronomical unit. So good That is one astronomical unit. So good observing, sir. Well done. observing, sir. Well done. observing, sir. Well done. Thank you very much. Oh, there was Hey, Thank you very much. Oh, there was Hey, Thank you very much. Oh, there was Hey, by the way, there was a a kid there by the way, there was a a kid there by the way, there was a a kid there today. We did it at the US Space and today. We did it at the US Space and today. We did it at the US Space and Rocket Center under the Saturn 5, but Rocket Center under the Saturn 5, but Rocket Center under the Saturn 5, but there was a kid there that made his own there was a kid there that made his own there was a kid there that made his own telescope out of PVC pipe. this. telescope out of PVC pipe. this. telescope out of PVC pipe. this. That's awesome, man. I wish I could make That's awesome, man. I wish I could make That's awesome, man. I wish I could make a telescope out of PVC pipe. a telescope out of PVC pipe. a telescope out of PVC pipe. Yeah, he told me how to do it. He ground Yeah, he told me how to do it. He ground Yeah, he told me how to do it. He ground the glass and everything. It's the glass and everything. It's the glass and everything. It's parabolic. parabolic. parabolic. Wow. I want to check that out. So, I'm Wow. I want to check that out. So, I'm Wow. I want to check that out. So, I'm going to put an annotation over to that going to put an annotation over to that going to put an annotation over to that video uh of Destin. So So, click on the video uh of Destin. So So, click on the video uh of Destin. So So, click on the iPhone here if you want to go see iPhone here if you want to go see iPhone here if you want to go see Dustin's video where uh you can make Dustin's video where uh you can make Dustin's video where uh you can make your own telescope out of PVC. your own telescope out of PVC. your own telescope out of PVC. I want an iPhone. I want an iPhone. I want an iPhone. Yeah. Yeah. Why? Yeah. Yeah. Why? Yeah. Yeah. Why? Cool. Yeah. Click the [laughter] iPhone. Cool. Yeah. Click the [laughter] iPhone. Cool. Yeah. Click the [laughter] iPhone. There you go. There you go. There you go. Click on it. Click on it. Click on it. All right, you better get to bed. All right, you better get to bed. All right, you better get to bed. Dude, I'm going crazy. I Yeah, I do need Dude, I'm going crazy. I Yeah, I do need Dude, I'm going crazy. I Yeah, I do need some sleep, so I'll let you go. some sleep, so I'll let you go. some sleep, so I'll let you go. All right, we'll catch you later. Have a All right, we'll catch you later. Have a All right, we'll catch you later. Have a good night.