Title: Types of Radiation
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tYmMtSWPQEI

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en At the end of the 1800s, physicists were At the end of the 1800s, physicists were At the end of the 1800s, physicists were staggered to find there was radiation staggered to find there was radiation staggered to find there was radiation coming out of all kinds of things, just coming out of all kinds of things, just coming out of all kinds of things, just dirt and rocks. Uh the very first time dirt and rocks. Uh the very first time dirt and rocks. Uh the very first time this was discovered was with a jar of this was discovered was with a jar of this was discovered was with a jar of uranium salts that was left in a drawer uranium salts that was left in a drawer uranium salts that was left in a drawer overnight. And in the morning, uh a overnight. And in the morning, uh a overnight. And in the morning, uh a photographic plate that was next to it photographic plate that was next to it photographic plate that was next to it had been exposed even though it had been had been exposed even though it had been had been exposed even though it had been in the dark all night. So where had the in the dark all night. So where had the in the dark all night. So where had the radiation came from? From this stuff, radiation came from? From this stuff, radiation came from? From this stuff, uranium salt. It was so to discover that uranium salt. It was so to discover that uranium salt. It was so to discover that dirt was giving out radiation. There was dirt was giving out radiation. There was dirt was giving out radiation. There was worse in store. They discovered that worse in store. They discovered that worse in store. They discovered that there were three different types of there were three different types of there were three different types of radiation going on. Uh so they really radiation going on. Uh so they really radiation going on. Uh so they really had no idea what was what was happening. had no idea what was what was happening. had no idea what was what was happening. Um so what do you do as a scientist? You Um so what do you do as a scientist? You Um so what do you do as a scientist? You name it. So they named it A radiation, B name it. So they named it A radiation, B name it. So they named it A radiation, B radiation, C radiation. Well, that's a radiation, C radiation. Well, that's a radiation, C radiation. Well, that's a bit dull really, isn't it? So maybe bit dull really, isn't it? So maybe bit dull really, isn't it? So maybe let's go for something more sciency. let's go for something more sciency. let's go for something more sciency. Alpha, beta, gamma. Yeah, that's much Alpha, beta, gamma. Yeah, that's much Alpha, beta, gamma. Yeah, that's much better. I've got an example here. I've better. I've got an example here. I've better. I've got an example here. I've got uh some alpha, beta, and gamma got uh some alpha, beta, and gamma got uh some alpha, beta, and gamma radiation. Uh gamma sources here. I also radiation. Uh gamma sources here. I also radiation. Uh gamma sources here. I also have a Geiger counter, which is uh a have a Geiger counter, which is uh a have a Geiger counter, which is uh a little device that gives off a click little device that gives off a click little device that gives off a click when it detects radiation. So, I can when it detects radiation. So, I can when it detects radiation. So, I can hold it over the source. You can hear hold it over the source. You can hear hold it over the source. You can hear you get a lot of clicks. So, what are the different types? So our So, what are the different types? So our So, what are the different types? So our alpha it turned out pretty much completely blocked by pretty much completely blocked by pretty much completely blocked by paper whereas the beta whereas the beta whereas the beta and the gamma makes basically no difference. So if we makes basically no difference. So if we makes basically no difference. So if we try lead try lead try lead our alphas are completely blocked strontium strontium strontium the beta is pretty much blocked but our gamma source but our gamma source but our gamma source it makes basically no difference. So, we it makes basically no difference. So, we it makes basically no difference. So, we can even go to a thick solid piece of can even go to a thick solid piece of can even go to a thick solid piece of lead. And you can still see some things are And you can still see some things are And you can still see some things are getting through there. getting through there. getting through there. Um, so we could try. There's a bit penetrating through. There's a bit penetrating through. There's a bit penetrating through. So, but I think I must be thicker than So, but I think I must be thicker than So, but I think I must be thicker than lead. So, what are our three types of lead. So, what are our three types of lead. So, what are our three types of radiation? Science. Scientists radiation? Science. Scientists radiation? Science. Scientists eventually worked out that the alpha eventually worked out that the alpha eventually worked out that the alpha radiation is matter. So it's two radiation is matter. So it's two radiation is matter. So it's two protons, two neutrons. That's the protons, two neutrons. That's the protons, two neutrons. That's the nucleus of helium. nucleus of helium. nucleus of helium. Uh the beta source gives out electrons Uh the beta source gives out electrons Uh the beta source gives out electrons and the gamma source gives out and the gamma source gives out and the gamma source gives out electromagnetic radiation.