Title: What Powers Australia
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmI_9Hty-Lw

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Where does Australia get most of its uh Where does Australia get most of its uh Where does Australia get most of its uh electricity from? electricity from? electricity from? I would think like wind turbines or I would think like wind turbines or I would think like wind turbines or something. something. something. Solar, wind, wind, um solar panels, Solar, wind, wind, um solar panels, Solar, wind, wind, um solar panels, water power. water power. water power. I think you have one nuclear power I think you have one nuclear power I think you have one nuclear power plant. plant. plant. I don't think we have thermal yet. I don't think we have thermal yet. I don't think we have thermal yet. Hydroelectric and nuclear, don't they? Hydroelectric and nuclear, don't they? Hydroelectric and nuclear, don't they? No. Coal. Coal and No. Coal. Coal and No. Coal. Coal and coal. coal. coal. Mostly coal. It's coal. Mostly coal. It's coal. Mostly coal. It's coal. Nonrenewable sources such as coal. What about having nuclear in Australia? What about having nuclear in Australia? What about having nuclear in Australia? Would you want that or not? Would you want that or not? Would you want that or not? I don't think I would be supportive. I'm I don't think I would be supportive. I'm I don't think I would be supportive. I'm more for like solar and wind power. I more for like solar and wind power. I more for like solar and wind power. I would not want it. I would like to see would not want it. I would like to see would not want it. I would like to see other cleaner technologies pursued such other cleaner technologies pursued such other cleaner technologies pursued such as wind power, green energy, solar as wind power, green energy, solar as wind power, green energy, solar power. power. power. I mean, I don't really know everything I mean, I don't really know everything I mean, I don't really know everything about it, but it can be pretty dangerous about it, but it can be pretty dangerous about it, but it can be pretty dangerous if it does get damaged. So I don't know if it does get damaged. So I don't know if it does get damaged. So I don't know I think there's better options I think there's better options I think there's better options from my point of view we have actually from my point of view we have actually from my point of view we have actually many uh nuclear power plants in Japan many uh nuclear power plants in Japan many uh nuclear power plants in Japan right so it's it's almost like normal right so it's it's almost like normal right so it's it's almost like normal now so I can't say anything but yeah now so I can't say anything but yeah now so I can't say anything but yeah Australian people might feel or might go Australian people might feel or might go Australian people might feel or might go against it against it against it the population as a whole like we don't the population as a whole like we don't the population as a whole like we don't know much about it but I think mass know much about it but I think mass know much about it but I think mass publicity is very negative about it publicity is very negative about it publicity is very negative about it because of the mistakes That's because of the mistakes That's because of the mistakes That's debatable. debatable. debatable. It is debatable. And which side of the It is debatable. And which side of the It is debatable. And which side of the debate would you be on? debate would you be on? debate would you be on? Well, it's kind of hard to say because Well, it's kind of hard to say because Well, it's kind of hard to say because it does like well, it generates energy it does like well, it generates energy it does like well, it generates energy and whatnot with um not using the coal and whatnot with um not using the coal and whatnot with um not using the coal which is running out. And there's which is running out. And there's which is running out. And there's different like they're making more different like they're making more different like they're making more efficient ways to get rid of the waste, efficient ways to get rid of the waste, efficient ways to get rid of the waste, although there's still although there's still although there's still like some waste. But then again, if you like some waste. But then again, if you like some waste. But then again, if you do have a meltdown or something along do have a meltdown or something along do have a meltdown or something along those lines, then it can be really those lines, then it can be really those lines, then it can be really harmful to a lot of people. I'm for harmful to a lot of people. I'm for harmful to a lot of people. I'm for nuclear energy as long as it's away from nuclear energy as long as it's away from nuclear energy as long as it's away from populations where this sort of stuff populations where this sort of stuff populations where this sort of stuff can't happen. I mean, we have a lot of can't happen. I mean, we have a lot of can't happen. I mean, we have a lot of like spare land. So, if we stuck it out like spare land. So, if we stuck it out like spare land. So, if we stuck it out in the desert somewhere, I don't think in the desert somewhere, I don't think in the desert somewhere, I don't think that it would affect too many people. that it would affect too many people. that it would affect too many people. Would you want nuclear power in Would you want nuclear power in Would you want nuclear power in Australia? Australia? Australia? Oh, god. Yes. Oh, god. Yes. Oh, god. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Tell me why. Tell me why. Tell me why. It's clean apart from the waste, but I'm It's clean apart from the waste, but I'm It's clean apart from the waste, but I'm sure we'll figure something out with sure we'll figure something out with sure we'll figure something out with that. Um, that. Um, that. Um, but what about the potential of but what about the potential of but what about the potential of something like what's happening in something like what's happening in something like what's happening in Japan? that the main one that they're Japan? that the main one that they're Japan? that the main one that they're worried about there was an old reactor worried about there was an old reactor worried about there was an old reactor was supposed to go out of commission was supposed to go out of commission was supposed to go out of commission very shortly. They couldn't have very shortly. They couldn't have very shortly. They couldn't have foreseen an a uh a natural disaster foreseen an a uh a natural disaster foreseen an a uh a natural disaster coming. I think it was a bit of a fluke coming. I think it was a bit of a fluke coming. I think it was a bit of a fluke accident and I think every year they're accident and I think every year they're accident and I think every year they're developing these uh nuclear power plants developing these uh nuclear power plants developing these uh nuclear power plants more and more. We've getting a better more and more. We've getting a better more and more. We've getting a better understanding of it and I think it's a understanding of it and I think it's a understanding of it and I think it's a very safe viable way of generating very safe viable way of generating very safe viable way of generating power. Well, yeah. I think it's probably power. Well, yeah. I think it's probably power. Well, yeah. I think it's probably the cleanest alternative we got at the the cleanest alternative we got at the the cleanest alternative we got at the moment. As you know, like coal releases moment. As you know, like coal releases moment. As you know, like coal releases a lot of stuff into the atmosphere, and a lot of stuff into the atmosphere, and a lot of stuff into the atmosphere, and I think it'd be very naive to think that I think it'd be very naive to think that I think it'd be very naive to think that doesn't have an effect. Also, if you're doesn't have an effect. Also, if you're doesn't have an effect. Also, if you're using something like wind power or using something like wind power or using something like wind power or something like that, you have to clear a something like that, you have to clear a something like that, you have to clear a lot of land to make it viable because lot of land to make it viable because lot of land to make it viable because it's not really that efficient. So, I it's not really that efficient. So, I it's not really that efficient. So, I think you really nuclear is our only think you really nuclear is our only think you really nuclear is our only option for mass production of power. And option for mass production of power. And option for mass production of power. And considering we have a growing considering we have a growing considering we have a growing population, it's the only option we've population, it's the only option we've population, it's the only option we've really got.