Title: What Now For The Higgs Boson
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=649iUqrOKuE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en We are on our way to CERN in Geneva. And We are on our way to CERN in Geneva. And We are on our way to CERN in Geneva. And this is Jean Mark, the cameraman. Hi. this is Jean Mark, the cameraman. Hi. this is Jean Mark, the cameraman. Hi. And uh we should be coming up on it. And uh we should be coming up on it. And uh we should be coming up on it. That's the dome. That's the famous CERN That's the dome. That's the famous CERN That's the dome. That's the famous CERN dome up ahead. dome up ahead. dome up ahead. Ah, this is pretty exciting. [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] On July 4th here at CERN, an historic On July 4th here at CERN, an historic On July 4th here at CERN, an historic announcement was made. A new particle announcement was made. A new particle announcement was made. A new particle had been discovered, most likely the had been discovered, most likely the had been discovered, most likely the sought-after Higs Bzon. sought-after Higs Bzon. sought-after Higs Bzon. As a layman, I would now say I think we As a layman, I would now say I think we As a layman, I would now say I think we have it. have it. have it. You agree? You agree? You agree? Yeah. The finding made news around the world and led to an outpouring of emotion from and led to an outpouring of emotion from and led to an outpouring of emotion from the normally restrained particle physics the normally restrained particle physics the normally restrained particle physics community. community. community. For the discoverers themselves, it was For the discoverers themselves, it was For the discoverers themselves, it was particularly momentous. particularly momentous. particularly momentous. Wow. I mean, it was I've never seen Wow. I mean, it was I've never seen Wow. I mean, it was I've never seen physicists like this. It really looks physicists like this. It really looks physicists like this. It really looks beautiful. I cannot tell you how beautiful. I cannot tell you how beautiful. I cannot tell you how beautiful it is. It makes you cry how beautiful it is. It makes you cry how beautiful it is. It makes you cry how beautiful it is. beautiful it is. beautiful it is. That's why we're here essentially, you That's why we're here essentially, you That's why we're here essentially, you know, that that's that's the reason why know, that that's that's the reason why know, that that's that's the reason why I I'm doing particle physics. I I'm doing particle physics. I I'm doing particle physics. But now that this particle has been But now that this particle has been But now that this particle has been found, what's left to do at the Large found, what's left to do at the Large found, what's left to do at the Large Hadron Collider? Let's find out. Hadron Collider? Let's find out. Hadron Collider? Let's find out. Our current understanding of the Our current understanding of the Our current understanding of the universe is based on the modestly named universe is based on the modestly named universe is based on the modestly named standard model, a theory of all standard model, a theory of all standard model, a theory of all fundamental matter particles and their fundamental matter particles and their fundamental matter particles and their interactions. interactions. interactions. Virtually all of the standard model has Virtually all of the standard model has Virtually all of the standard model has been verified apart from one crucial been verified apart from one crucial been verified apart from one crucial element. element. element. What gives matter its mass? And to be What gives matter its mass? And to be What gives matter its mass? And to be clear, that is absolutely critically clear, that is absolutely critically clear, that is absolutely critically important even to our daily existence. important even to our daily existence. important even to our daily existence. Because if an electron would be Because if an electron would be Because if an electron would be massless, it could not be bound to a massless, it could not be bound to a massless, it could not be bound to a proton. You could not have an atom and proton. You could not have an atom and proton. You could not have an atom and then you know sort of all of you know then you know sort of all of you know then you know sort of all of you know the stars, the planets, chemistry, life the stars, the planets, chemistry, life the stars, the planets, chemistry, life couldn't couldn't exist because instead couldn't couldn't exist because instead couldn't couldn't exist because instead of electrons bound to protons in in of electrons bound to protons in in of electrons bound to protons in in hydrogen atoms and in and in larger hydrogen atoms and in and in larger hydrogen atoms and in and in larger atoms instead you would just have atoms instead you would just have atoms instead you would just have electrons whizzing off to infinity. electrons whizzing off to infinity. electrons whizzing off to infinity. In the standard model, mass is explained In the standard model, mass is explained In the standard model, mass is explained by the Higs mechanism of which the Higs by the Higs mechanism of which the Higs by the Higs mechanism of which the Higs Bzon is only one part. For example, Bzon is only one part. For example, Bzon is only one part. For example, you've probably heard that the Higs Bzon you've probably heard that the Higs Bzon you've probably heard that the Higs Bzon gives mass to the other subatomic gives mass to the other subatomic gives mass to the other subatomic particles. But if that were true, particles. But if that were true, particles. But if that were true, shouldn't there be Higs Bzons shouldn't there be Higs Bzons shouldn't there be Higs Bzons everywhere? I mean, why would it be so everywhere? I mean, why would it be so everywhere? I mean, why would it be so difficult to create and detect them? difficult to create and detect them? difficult to create and detect them? Well, in truth, it's not the particle Well, in truth, it's not the particle Well, in truth, it's not the particle itself that gives mass to the other itself that gives mass to the other itself that gives mass to the other particles. It's the Higs field. particles. It's the Higs field. particles. It's the Higs field. You can think of the Higs field as a You can think of the Higs field as a You can think of the Higs field as a huge sea of honey that fills all space. huge sea of honey that fills all space. huge sea of honey that fills all space. Some particles are able to travel Some particles are able to travel Some particles are able to travel through it unimpeded whilst others through it unimpeded whilst others through it unimpeded whilst others interact with it, slowing down in the interact with it, slowing down in the interact with it, slowing down in the process and that translates into mass. process and that translates into mass. process and that translates into mass. When enough high energy is added to the When enough high energy is added to the When enough high energy is added to the field, fleeting Higs bzons are created. field, fleeting Higs bzons are created. field, fleeting Higs bzons are created. So in order to discover the Higs So in order to discover the Higs So in order to discover the Higs particle, we needed to invest energy by particle, we needed to invest energy by particle, we needed to invest energy by the collision in the Higs field and the collision in the Higs field and the collision in the Higs field and create the Higs particle out of it. And create the Higs particle out of it. And create the Higs particle out of it. And then we'll know that indeed we have a then we'll know that indeed we have a then we'll know that indeed we have a Higs. And that's what this incredible Higs. And that's what this incredible Higs. And that's what this incredible machine does. Using powerful magnets, machine does. Using powerful magnets, machine does. Using powerful magnets, the Large Hadron Collider whizzes two the Large Hadron Collider whizzes two the Large Hadron Collider whizzes two beams of protons in opposite directions beams of protons in opposite directions beams of protons in opposite directions around a 27 km circular tunnel. When the around a 27 km circular tunnel. When the around a 27 km circular tunnel. When the protons collide, their energy can be protons collide, their energy can be protons collide, their energy can be converted into the mass of new particles converted into the mass of new particles converted into the mass of new particles like the Higs Bzon. Short-lived, these like the Higs Bzon. Short-lived, these like the Higs Bzon. Short-lived, these particles decay quickly, and it's their particles decay quickly, and it's their particles decay quickly, and it's their decay products which are then analyzed decay products which are then analyzed decay products which are then analyzed by massive detectors. by massive detectors. by massive detectors. This is the giant apparatus at the CMS This is the giant apparatus at the CMS This is the giant apparatus at the CMS detector. It's one of two major detector. It's one of two major detector. It's one of two major detectors on the beam line where the detectors on the beam line where the detectors on the beam line where the protons collide. You can actually see a protons collide. You can actually see a protons collide. You can actually see a life-siz picture of the CMS detector. I life-siz picture of the CMS detector. I life-siz picture of the CMS detector. I am standing above the beam line. And so am standing above the beam line. And so am standing above the beam line. And so there's protons whizzing around there's protons whizzing around there's protons whizzing around underneath my feet right now, 90 m under underneath my feet right now, 90 m under underneath my feet right now, 90 m under the ground at speeds that are basically the ground at speeds that are basically the ground at speeds that are basically the speed of light. 99.9999999% the speed of light. You may as well just the speed of light. You may as well just the speed of light. You may as well just be the speed of light, but of course a be the speed of light, but of course a be the speed of light, but of course a proton can never reach that speed. proton can never reach that speed. proton can never reach that speed. These are some big toys. These are some big toys. These are some big toys. The other big experiment examining The other big experiment examining The other big experiment examining proton collisions is called Atlas. proton collisions is called Atlas. proton collisions is called Atlas. The teams at Atlas and CMS, each made up The teams at Atlas and CMS, each made up The teams at Atlas and CMS, each made up of about 3,000 scientists, work of about 3,000 scientists, work of about 3,000 scientists, work independently in a sort of friendly independently in a sort of friendly independently in a sort of friendly rivalry. uh rivalry. uh rivalry. uh is it actually friendly? is it actually friendly? is it actually friendly? Yes, of course it is. I mean we uh what Yes, of course it is. I mean we uh what Yes, of course it is. I mean we uh what we what we always say is that uh of we what we always say is that uh of we what we always say is that uh of course it's essential that if if there's course it's essential that if if there's course it's essential that if if there's a major discovery which is made that a major discovery which is made that a major discovery which is made that it's confirmed ultimately by the two it's confirmed ultimately by the two it's confirmed ultimately by the two experiments and independently and that's experiments and independently and that's experiments and independently and that's why the discovery announced earlier this why the discovery announced earlier this why the discovery announced earlier this year was so dramatic. Both detectors saw year was so dramatic. Both detectors saw year was so dramatic. Both detectors saw the same results more or less the same results more or less the same results more or less simultaneously. Protons are bags of other particles. Protons are bags of other particles. Protons are bags of other particles. When they smash together, a mess of new When they smash together, a mess of new When they smash together, a mess of new particles is created. And it's the particles is created. And it's the particles is created. And it's the pattern of the debris that provides the pattern of the debris that provides the pattern of the debris that provides the answers. answers. answers. What they saw was evidence of a new What they saw was evidence of a new What they saw was evidence of a new particle with a mass of between 125 and particle with a mass of between 125 and particle with a mass of between 125 and 126 ga electron volts. 126 ga electron volts. 126 ga electron volts. And then we see these two large blobs of And then we see these two large blobs of And then we see these two large blobs of energy in the calerime. And you can see energy in the calerime. And you can see energy in the calerime. And you can see them over here. them over here. them over here. If you added those two bits of energy If you added those two bits of energy If you added those two bits of energy together, what total energy would you together, what total energy would you together, what total energy would you get? I think in this one you get 125 GV. get? I think in this one you get 125 GV. get? I think in this one you get 125 GV. So that seems to be exactly what we'd be So that seems to be exactly what we'd be So that seems to be exactly what we'd be expecting if it's a expecting if it's a expecting if it's a Hig with gamma gamma. Hig with gamma gamma. Hig with gamma gamma. But the question now is if it is a Higs, But the question now is if it is a Higs, But the question now is if it is a Higs, is it the Higs as predicted by the is it the Higs as predicted by the is it the Higs as predicted by the standard model? standard model? standard model? Are you willing to to make a bet about Are you willing to to make a bet about Are you willing to to make a bet about what kind of Higs Bzon is? Do you think what kind of Higs Bzon is? Do you think what kind of Higs Bzon is? Do you think it's the standard model Higs? it's the standard model Higs? it's the standard model Higs? Wow, that's a difficult one. No, I Wow, that's a difficult one. No, I Wow, that's a difficult one. No, I wouldn't bet my life on uh I might bet wouldn't bet my life on uh I might bet wouldn't bet my life on uh I might bet my life that we discovered the Higs, but my life that we discovered the Higs, but my life that we discovered the Higs, but I wouldn't bet my life that it is the I wouldn't bet my life that it is the I wouldn't bet my life that it is the standard model Hicks. It's very standard model Hicks. It's very standard model Hicks. It's very difficult to tell. difficult to tell. difficult to tell. All we know is it's there. We we almost All we know is it's there. We we almost All we know is it's there. We we almost know nothing about its properties and know nothing about its properties and know nothing about its properties and its properties are key really to tell us its properties are key really to tell us its properties are key really to tell us exactly what it is. exactly what it is. exactly what it is. So to find out the LHC will conduct many So to find out the LHC will conduct many So to find out the LHC will conduct many more collisions and this should allow more collisions and this should allow more collisions and this should allow scientists to determine the properties scientists to determine the properties scientists to determine the properties of the new particle. of the new particle. of the new particle. If it is not standard model Higs, we may If it is not standard model Higs, we may If it is not standard model Higs, we may be able to tell that early. We could be able to tell that early. We could be able to tell that early. We could even tell that this year. As an example, even tell that this year. As an example, even tell that this year. As an example, uh both experiments saw a bit too many uh both experiments saw a bit too many uh both experiments saw a bit too many photons. Too many times the Higs was photons. Too many times the Higs was photons. Too many times the Higs was decaying into photons. more than you'd decaying into photons. more than you'd decaying into photons. more than you'd expect. expect. expect. more than you'd expect. And in the case more than you'd expect. And in the case more than you'd expect. And in the case of of of strangely, that's exactly what these strangely, that's exactly what these strangely, that's exactly what these guys are hoping for, that it doesn't fit guys are hoping for, that it doesn't fit guys are hoping for, that it doesn't fit the model perfectly, that it's not the the model perfectly, that it's not the the model perfectly, that it's not the standard model Higs. standard model Higs. standard model Higs. Let let's say that the reason for doing Let let's say that the reason for doing Let let's say that the reason for doing science is of course we're looking for science is of course we're looking for science is of course we're looking for answers, but generating more questions answers, but generating more questions answers, but generating more questions is is an inevitable and and one of the is is an inevitable and and one of the is is an inevitable and and one of the most exciting uh pieces of of of the most exciting uh pieces of of of the most exciting uh pieces of of of the scientific procedure. scientific procedure. scientific procedure. And what would that help you determine? And what would that help you determine? And what would that help you determine? I mean, if it's not standard model Higs, I mean, if it's not standard model Higs, I mean, if it's not standard model Higs, that's a big thing. If it's not standard that's a big thing. If it's not standard that's a big thing. If it's not standard model Higs, model Higs, model Higs, then we know that there's new physics then we know that there's new physics then we know that there's new physics for sure. And if the new physics is for sure. And if the new physics is for sure. And if the new physics is along the lines that we expect, then we along the lines that we expect, then we along the lines that we expect, then we have something pretty profound as a have something pretty profound as a have something pretty profound as a possibility. One would be additional possibility. One would be additional possibility. One would be additional spatial dimensions. Okay, that's one spatial dimensions. Okay, that's one spatial dimensions. Okay, that's one possibility. Another would be really possibility. Another would be really possibility. Another would be really almost a mirror image of the entire almost a mirror image of the entire almost a mirror image of the entire universe in terms of particles. That's universe in terms of particles. That's universe in terms of particles. That's super symmetry. And and these things super symmetry. And and these things super symmetry. And and these things would be extremely profound. would be extremely profound. would be extremely profound. Whether it turns out to be the standard Whether it turns out to be the standard Whether it turns out to be the standard model Higs or something even more model Higs or something even more model Higs or something even more profound, one thing is for sure. The profound, one thing is for sure. The profound, one thing is for sure. The discovery of this new particle is a huge discovery of this new particle is a huge discovery of this new particle is a huge milestone in the long quest to uncover milestone in the long quest to uncover milestone in the long quest to uncover the fundamental laws of nature. the fundamental laws of nature. the fundamental laws of nature. [Music] I see. [Music] When it goes up, [Music]