Title: What Causes The Northern Lights
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=knwiWm4DpvQ

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Welcome to Alaska. I'm just outside of Welcome to Alaska. I'm just outside of Welcome to Alaska. I'm just outside of Fairbanks and I'm trying to find the Fairbanks and I'm trying to find the Fairbanks and I'm trying to find the northern lights, the Aurora Borealis. northern lights, the Aurora Borealis. northern lights, the Aurora Borealis. But the conditions haven't been ideal But the conditions haven't been ideal But the conditions haven't been ideal because tonight [music] it's a bit because tonight [music] it's a bit because tonight [music] it's a bit cloudy, a bit hazy, and we've got a moon cloudy, a bit hazy, and we've got a moon cloudy, a bit hazy, and we've got a moon out which is nearly full. So, it makes out which is nearly full. So, it makes out which is nearly full. So, it makes it very difficult [music] to spot these it very difficult [music] to spot these it very difficult [music] to spot these northern lights. So, what are we northern lights. So, what are we northern lights. So, what are we actually looking at up there with the actually looking at up there with the actually looking at up there with the aurora? aurora? aurora? The electromagnetic fields working The electromagnetic fields working The electromagnetic fields working through the gravity, you know, and and through the gravity, you know, and and through the gravity, you know, and and the particles that work off of that. the particles that work off of that. the particles that work off of that. What do you have to have happen in order What do you have to have happen in order What do you have to have happen in order to get those lights? to get those lights? to get those lights? Cold. [laughter] Cold. [laughter] Cold. [laughter] You're going to be looking at solar You're going to be looking at solar You're going to be looking at solar activities. It has to do with solar activities. It has to do with solar activities. It has to do with solar flares as the flares are coming. flares as the flares are coming. flares as the flares are coming. I know it has to do something with the I know it has to do something with the I know it has to do something with the sun and discharge and it's solar flare. sun and discharge and it's solar flare. sun and discharge and it's solar flare. [music] [music] [music] The sun has just put on quite a show. The sun has just put on quite a show. The sun has just put on quite a show. Take a look at these amazing pictures Take a look at these amazing pictures Take a look at these amazing pictures captured by a NASA spacecraft [music] captured by a NASA spacecraft [music] captured by a NASA spacecraft [music] yesterday. It's a powerful solar flare yesterday. It's a powerful solar flare yesterday. It's a powerful solar flare shooting superheated particles and shooting superheated particles and shooting superheated particles and plasma deep into space. plasma deep into space. plasma deep into space. No one knows what's really going on No one knows what's really going on No one knows what's really going on those pictures. They just look cool. those pictures. They just look cool. those pictures. They just look cool. That's all it is. They just look cool. That's all it is. They just look cool. That's all it is. They just look cool. So, we put it on the news. Yeah. So, we put it on the news. Yeah. So, we put it on the news. Yeah. So, what sort of stuff is coming from So, what sort of stuff is coming from So, what sort of stuff is coming from the sun? the sun? the sun? Um, it is uh Um, it is uh Um, it is uh uh I believe it's solar radiation. Uh uh I believe it's solar radiation. Uh uh I believe it's solar radiation. Uh other than that, I don't know. other than that, I don't know. other than that, I don't know. Photons and you know, neurons, Photons and you know, neurons, Photons and you know, neurons, superfluidity of neurons. superfluidity of neurons. superfluidity of neurons. What's the sun made of mostly? What's the sun made of mostly? What's the sun made of mostly? Hydrogen I believe. Hydrogen I believe. Hydrogen I believe. Yeah. So, Yeah. So, Yeah. So, so if the sun spits out some of that so if the sun spits out some of that so if the sun spits out some of that stuff, stuff, stuff, right, right, right, it would be what what is a hydrogen it would be what what is a hydrogen it would be what what is a hydrogen atom? What's it made of? atom? What's it made of? atom? What's it made of? Just hydrogen, uh, neutrons, electrons, Just hydrogen, uh, neutrons, electrons, Just hydrogen, uh, neutrons, electrons, you know. So, you know. So, you know. So, in the case of hydrogen, it's the in the case of hydrogen, it's the in the case of hydrogen, it's the simplest atom. It's just a proton and an simplest atom. It's just a proton and an simplest atom. It's just a proton and an electron. electron. electron. Okay, Okay, Okay, that's it. So, when we're talking about that's it. So, when we're talking about that's it. So, when we're talking about stuff coming from the sun, just talking stuff coming from the sun, just talking stuff coming from the sun, just talking about streams of protons and electrons. about streams of protons and electrons. about streams of protons and electrons. Okay, Okay, Okay, there's stuff coming from the sun. Yes. there's stuff coming from the sun. Yes. there's stuff coming from the sun. Yes. And then what does it do? uh lights up And then what does it do? uh lights up And then what does it do? uh lights up because because because they just that's I'm [laughter] they just that's I'm [laughter] they just that's I'm [laughter] They're just there. They're just there. They're just there. They're just there. They're just there. They're just there. Yeah, they just happen. Yeah, they just happen. Yeah, they just happen. I've had a little bit of luck and I've I've had a little bit of luck and I've I've had a little bit of luck and I've been trying to shoot them. So, I'll put been trying to shoot them. So, I'll put been trying to shoot them. So, I'll put up some of that footage uh so you can up some of that footage uh so you can up some of that footage uh so you can check it out. And you can think about uh check it out. And you can think about uh check it out. And you can think about uh these particles that must be streaming these particles that must be streaming these particles that must be streaming in from the sun, colliding with our in from the sun, colliding with our in from the sun, colliding with our upper atmosphere and [music] then uh upper atmosphere and [music] then uh upper atmosphere and [music] then uh exciting it. And so it releases that exciting it. And so it releases that exciting it. And so it releases that light when it deexites. [music] Why does it come to Alaska and not say Why does it come to Alaska and not say Why does it come to Alaska and not say Hawaii or [music] the Caribbean? It's Hawaii or [music] the Caribbean? It's Hawaii or [music] the Caribbean? It's the northern lights. the northern lights. the northern lights. It is in Well, It is in Well, It is in Well, why are you guys so special? why are you guys so special? why are you guys so special? I'm not sure honestly. I'm not sure honestly. I'm not sure honestly. Like it's been seen down in like Mexico Like it's been seen down in like Mexico Like it's been seen down in like Mexico and stuff. It's like the reds have been and stuff. It's like the reds have been and stuff. It's like the reds have been seen down in Mexico. Um I've actually seen down in Mexico. Um I've actually seen down in Mexico. Um I've actually seen it in Mexico by my where my seen it in Mexico by my where my seen it in Mexico by my where my grandmother lives. I think it just has grandmother lives. I think it just has grandmother lives. I think it just has to do with the nor northern hemisphere to do with the nor northern hemisphere to do with the nor northern hemisphere and how much like little less sun we get and how much like little less sun we get and how much like little less sun we get so you can see it more. I'm sure it so you can see it more. I'm sure it so you can see it more. I'm sure it happens in the southern hemisphere. You happens in the southern hemisphere. You happens in the southern hemisphere. You just have a lot of light down there. just have a lot of light down there. just have a lot of light down there. Like their sky is brighter at night. Like their sky is brighter at night. Like their sky is brighter at night. Well, oh god, Well, oh god, Well, oh god, I'm just asking. I'm just asking. I'm just asking. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It has to do with magnetic fields and It has to do with magnetic fields and It has to do with magnetic fields and the closer you get to the magnetic the closer you get to the magnetic the closer you get to the magnetic fields, the more the lights you're able fields, the more the lights you're able fields, the more the lights you're able to see. And to see. And to see. And then yeah, you're right about the then yeah, you're right about the then yeah, you're right about the magnetosphere. It deflects them around magnetosphere. It deflects them around magnetosphere. It deflects them around towards the poles and they hit the towards the poles and they hit the towards the poles and they hit the atmosphere and they excite the atmosphere and they excite the atmosphere and they excite the atmosphere. And when it deexites, it's atmosphere. And when it deexites, it's atmosphere. And when it deexites, it's okay. Okay, giving off that light. So, okay. Okay, giving off that light. So, okay. Okay, giving off that light. So, I'm here in Fairbanks with T. Neil Davis I'm here in Fairbanks with T. Neil Davis I'm here in Fairbanks with T. Neil Davis and thank you for speaking to me today. and thank you for speaking to me today. and thank you for speaking to me today. You're You're You're welcome. welcome. welcome. All right, so we were out looking for All right, so we were out looking for All right, so we were out looking for the aurora. I guess one major question the aurora. I guess one major question the aurora. I guess one major question that a lot of people would have is what that a lot of people would have is what that a lot of people would have is what [music] is it? The aurora is is the [music] is it? The aurora is is the [music] is it? The aurora is is the result of charged particles coming down result of charged particles coming down result of charged particles coming down uh the magnetic long magnetic field uh the magnetic long magnetic field uh the magnetic long magnetic field [music] lines which is essentially [music] lines which is essentially [music] lines which is essentially vertical here. And the uh those vertical here. And the uh those vertical here. And the uh those high-speed particles then [music] strike high-speed particles then [music] strike high-speed particles then [music] strike the gases in the upper atmosphere and uh the gases in the upper atmosphere and uh the gases in the upper atmosphere and uh impart energy to those gases, [music] impart energy to those gases, [music] impart energy to those gases, [music] excite the atoms and molecules. Fairly excite the atoms and molecules. Fairly excite the atoms and molecules. Fairly shortly thereafter, the shortly thereafter, the shortly thereafter, the uh the atoms and molecules deexatite by uh the atoms and molecules deexatite by uh the atoms and molecules deexatite by giving off quantum light and that's what giving off quantum light and that's what giving off quantum light and that's what we see. we see. we see. What about the weather? Uh you know, What about the weather? Uh you know, What about the weather? Uh you know, last night it seemed like it was a bit last night it seemed like it was a bit last night it seemed like it was a bit overcast or [music] there was some there overcast or [music] there was some there overcast or [music] there was some there was some cloud up there. Does that also was some cloud up there. Does that also was some cloud up there. Does that also hinder hinder hinder Oh, yes. It Oh, yes. It Oh, yes. It wasn't a thick cloud layer, but there wasn't a thick cloud layer, but there wasn't a thick cloud layer, but there just seemed to be a bit of a haze. We just seemed to be a bit of a haze. We just seemed to be a bit of a haze. We had the moon out. had the moon out. had the moon out. Oh, well then you're really in trouble. Oh, well then you're really in trouble. Oh, well then you're really in trouble. Yeah. with the moon out and uh and uh a Yeah. with the moon out and uh and uh a Yeah. with the moon out and uh and uh a little haze then uh it's pretty tough to little haze then uh it's pretty tough to little haze then uh it's pretty tough to see the road. see the road. see the road. So, do you have any advice for us? How So, do you have any advice for us? How So, do you have any advice for us? How do we deal with conditions like that? I do we deal with conditions like that? I do we deal with conditions like that? I mean, [laughter] mean, [laughter] mean, [laughter] go to a bar and have a drink, I guess. But I just want to give you an idea But I just want to give you an idea But I just want to give you an idea because I have a different colored image because I have a different colored image because I have a different colored image behind me just to kind of give you a behind me just to kind of give you a behind me just to kind of give you a sense of scale. The sun right here, that sense of scale. The sun right here, that sense of scale. The sun right here, that would be the size of the Earth. You would be the size of the Earth. You would be the size of the Earth. You could put 20 Earths or so inside just could put 20 Earths or so inside just could put 20 Earths or so inside just that circle where the explosion that circle where the explosion that circle where the explosion occurred.