Title: What Is Chemistry
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CRSDxGtcsxE

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Hi, I'm Fiona McDonald and today we're Hi, I'm Fiona McDonald and today we're Hi, I'm Fiona McDonald and today we're finding out what chemistry means to the finding out what chemistry means to the finding out what chemistry means to the average Australian. How would you average Australian. How would you average Australian. How would you describe chemistry? describe chemistry? describe chemistry? Um, like test tubes. like test tubes. like test tubes. I'm not a very big science fan, so I I'm not a very big science fan, so I I'm not a very big science fan, so I don't really know any much about it. don't really know any much about it. don't really know any much about it. No idea. Ah, chemistry. No idea. Ah, chemistry. No idea. Ah, chemistry. I would say some sort of chemical I would say some sort of chemical I would say some sort of chemical compound. compound. compound. Chemistry is a science Chemistry is a science Chemistry is a science of of of the elements of our universe. the elements of our universe. the elements of our universe. Interaction of two things. Interaction of two things. Interaction of two things. Table and the table. The table elements. Table and the table. The table elements. Table and the table. The table elements. What's the periodic table? What's the periodic table? What's the periodic table? Periodic table. Periodic table. Periodic table. Chemistry you can define in a Chemistry you can define in a Chemistry you can define in a relationship. Chemistry in a scientific relationship. Chemistry in a scientific relationship. Chemistry in a scientific way. way. way. That's it. That's it. That's it. Yeah. What is chemistry? The love Yeah. What is chemistry? The love Yeah. What is chemistry? The love between guys and girls. between guys and girls. between guys and girls. Chemistry is animal attraction. Chemistry is animal attraction. Chemistry is animal attraction. The feeling you have in in your stomach. The feeling you have in in your stomach. The feeling you have in in your stomach. Yeah. Someone that like makes you want Yeah. Someone that like makes you want Yeah. Someone that like makes you want them, them, them, I guess. I guess. I guess. Immediately drawn to them and you feel Immediately drawn to them and you feel Immediately drawn to them and you feel you just want to be around them. you just want to be around them. you just want to be around them. Well, I think of it like chemistry Well, I think of it like chemistry Well, I think of it like chemistry between a boy and girl, like just that between a boy and girl, like just that between a boy and girl, like just that special thing that um you can't explain. special thing that um you can't explain. special thing that um you can't explain. And then I'd also just think about And then I'd also just think about And then I'd also just think about chemistry at school where I had to try chemistry at school where I had to try chemistry at school where I had to try and memorize like iron and copper and and memorize like iron and copper and and memorize like iron and copper and bles and fers. According to you guys, bles and fers. According to you guys, bles and fers. According to you guys, chemistry is more about love than chemistry is more about love than chemistry is more about love than science. But don't forget that without science. But don't forget that without science. But don't forget that without science, there is no love because it's science, there is no love because it's science, there is no love because it's all hormones, baby.