Title: What Are Atoms and Isotopes
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SeDaOigLBTU

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, what's an atom? So, what's an atom? So, what's an atom? An atom is um Oh, man. Something that An atom is um Oh, man. Something that An atom is um Oh, man. Something that builds up everything. builds up everything. builds up everything. Atom. Oh, that one. Um the small Atom. Oh, that one. Um the small Atom. Oh, that one. Um the small particle, isn't it? particle, isn't it? particle, isn't it? Atom. That's a very small um particle. Atom. That's a very small um particle. Atom. That's a very small um particle. An atom is the smallest indivisible part An atom is the smallest indivisible part An atom is the smallest indivisible part of a of an element. Can further divide of a of an element. Can further divide of a of an element. Can further divide an atom into protons and neutrons. an atom into protons and neutrons. an atom into protons and neutrons. Protons and neutrons. Is that it? It's Protons and neutrons. Is that it? It's Protons and neutrons. Is that it? It's just a small little thing that's made up just a small little thing that's made up just a small little thing that's made up of protons, electrons, and a neutron. of protons, electrons, and a neutron. of protons, electrons, and a neutron. All of the materials and and things are All of the materials and and things are All of the materials and and things are made up of of atoms. And then you've got made up of of atoms. And then you've got made up of of atoms. And then you've got the the nucleus and the electrons that the the nucleus and the electrons that the the nucleus and the electrons that go around the outside. That will be an go around the outside. That will be an go around the outside. That will be an atom, which is made up of the nucleus atom, which is made up of the nucleus atom, which is made up of the nucleus and electrons. There can be dozens of and electrons. There can be dozens of and electrons. There can be dozens of these electrons whizzing around in these electrons whizzing around in these electrons whizzing around in different scale, different orbits. And different scale, different orbits. And different scale, different orbits. And it's mainly mainly nothing. it's mainly mainly nothing. it's mainly mainly nothing. This is how it's represented. This is how it's represented. This is how it's represented. Yep. Yep. Yep. There's the proton and that's the There's the proton and that's the There's the proton and that's the electron. And then you have a neutron in electron. And then you have a neutron in electron. And then you have a neutron in there as well. And this thing spins there as well. And this thing spins there as well. And this thing spins around. But around. But around. But so it seems most people are comfortable so it seems most people are comfortable so it seems most people are comfortable with the idea that all matter is made up with the idea that all matter is made up with the idea that all matter is made up of atoms. That an atom is the of atoms. That an atom is the of atoms. That an atom is the fundamental building block of matter. fundamental building block of matter. fundamental building block of matter. And that these atoms are made up of And that these atoms are made up of And that these atoms are made up of smaller particles called protons, smaller particles called protons, smaller particles called protons, electrons, and neutrons. But after that, electrons, and neutrons. But after that, electrons, and neutrons. But after that, the details get a little bit hazy. the details get a little bit hazy. the details get a little bit hazy. It looks a bit like Saturn. [laughter] It looks a bit like Saturn. [laughter] It looks a bit like Saturn. [laughter] It does. It looks very much like Saturn. It does. It looks very much like Saturn. It does. It looks very much like Saturn. So what I'd like to do is actually build So what I'd like to do is actually build So what I'd like to do is actually build an atom, or at least a model of an atom. an atom, or at least a model of an atom. an atom, or at least a model of an atom. So I've got here uh proton, neutron, and So I've got here uh proton, neutron, and So I've got here uh proton, neutron, and electron. The simplest atom that I can electron. The simplest atom that I can electron. The simplest atom that I can make is hydrogen because hydrogen make is hydrogen because hydrogen make is hydrogen because hydrogen consists of only two particles, a little consists of only two particles, a little consists of only two particles, a little positive proton and a tiny little positive proton and a tiny little positive proton and a tiny little negative electron. They're attracted to negative electron. They're attracted to negative electron. They're attracted to each other because of their opposite each other because of their opposite each other because of their opposite charge. And so many people think of the charge. And so many people think of the charge. And so many people think of the electron as orbiting about the proton. electron as orbiting about the proton. electron as orbiting about the proton. That's not strictly true. I mean, it's That's not strictly true. I mean, it's That's not strictly true. I mean, it's not like a planet going around the sun, not like a planet going around the sun, not like a planet going around the sun, but because the proton is positively but because the proton is positively but because the proton is positively charged and the electron is negatively charged and the electron is negatively charged and the electron is negatively charged, they're both attracted towards charged, they're both attracted towards charged, they're both attracted towards each other. Now, what would happen if we each other. Now, what would happen if we each other. Now, what would happen if we took our hydrogen atom, which consists took our hydrogen atom, which consists took our hydrogen atom, which consists just of a proton and an electron, and we just of a proton and an electron, and we just of a proton and an electron, and we added a neutron into the nucleus? added a neutron into the nucleus? added a neutron into the nucleus? This hasn't really changed anything This hasn't really changed anything This hasn't really changed anything electrically because the proton and the electrically because the proton and the electrically because the proton and the electron are still opposite charges and electron are still opposite charges and electron are still opposite charges and attracting each other, and the neutron attracting each other, and the neutron attracting each other, and the neutron is neutral. So it doesn't really affect is neutral. So it doesn't really affect is neutral. So it doesn't really affect this interaction. So the atom that we this interaction. So the atom that we this interaction. So the atom that we have here is still hydrogen except it's have here is still hydrogen except it's have here is still hydrogen except it's just a little bit more massive. You just a little bit more massive. You just a little bit more massive. You could say it's heavier because the could say it's heavier because the could say it's heavier because the neutron is there. But um how does that neutron is there. But um how does that neutron is there. But um how does that really affect the behavior of u this really affect the behavior of u this really affect the behavior of u this atom? Well, the truth is it's not that atom? Well, the truth is it's not that atom? Well, the truth is it's not that different to regular hydrogen. different to regular hydrogen. different to regular hydrogen. And this is what we call an isotope. An And this is what we call an isotope. An And this is what we call an isotope. An isotope is a different version of the isotope is a different version of the isotope is a different version of the same element. So it has the same number same element. So it has the same number same element. So it has the same number of protons in the nucleus but just a of protons in the nucleus but just a of protons in the nucleus but just a different number of neutrons.