Title: What Causes The Phases Of The Moon
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jip3BbZBpsM

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] Now, I've been around Sydney and I've Now, I've been around Sydney and I've Now, I've been around Sydney and I've asked people, "What causes the phases of asked people, "What causes the phases of asked people, "What causes the phases of the moon?" And you know what they say? the moon?" And you know what they say? the moon?" And you know what they say? How do we get the phases of the moon? How do we get the phases of the moon? How do we get the phases of the moon? Uh because of the the earth blocks the Uh because of the the earth blocks the Uh because of the the earth blocks the the light that comes from the sun. the light that comes from the sun. the light that comes from the sun. A full moon is basically where we're A full moon is basically where we're A full moon is basically where we're seeing the full uh circle of the moon seeing the full uh circle of the moon seeing the full uh circle of the moon reflected back to Earth, reflected back to Earth, reflected back to Earth, but the light is actually coming from but the light is actually coming from but the light is actually coming from the sun. And the cresant where the the sun. And the cresant where the the sun. And the cresant where the cresants are caused by the shadows of cresants are caused by the shadows of cresants are caused by the shadows of the earth the earth the earth from the sun onto the moon. from the sun onto the moon. from the sun onto the moon. The phases of the moon is that about the The phases of the moon is that about the The phases of the moon is that about the sun and the moon sun and the moon sun and the moon and the and the something goes in front and the and the something goes in front and the and the something goes in front of something. of something. of something. The earth's between the moon and the The earth's between the moon and the The earth's between the moon and the sun. We won't see the moon and then it sun. We won't see the moon and then it sun. We won't see the moon and then it as it goes around the earth gets out of as it goes around the earth gets out of as it goes around the earth gets out of the way. So more of the sun shines on the way. So more of the sun shines on the way. So more of the sun shines on the moon and we can see the moon I the moon and we can see the moon I the moon and we can see the moon I think. think. think. So let's try to resolve it. What really So let's try to resolve it. What really So let's try to resolve it. What really causes the phases of the moon? phases of causes the phases of the moon? phases of causes the phases of the moon? phases of the moon. Um, we need to know a couple the moon. Um, we need to know a couple the moon. Um, we need to know a couple of things. First, one is there's only of things. First, one is there's only of things. First, one is there's only one source of light in the solar system one source of light in the solar system one source of light in the solar system and that's the sun. So, at the center of and that's the sun. So, at the center of and that's the sun. So, at the center of the solar system, it produces all the the solar system, it produces all the the solar system, it produces all the light. So, both the earth and the moon light. So, both the earth and the moon light. So, both the earth and the moon are half illuminated by that one source are half illuminated by that one source are half illuminated by that one source of light. As the moon moves around the of light. As the moon moves around the of light. As the moon moves around the earth, our perspective on it changes earth, our perspective on it changes earth, our perspective on it changes because sometimes we see just the unlit because sometimes we see just the unlit because sometimes we see just the unlit face of the moon. When the moon is face of the moon. When the moon is face of the moon. When the moon is between us and the sun, that's a new between us and the sun, that's a new between us and the sun, that's a new moon. At other times we'll see the moon moon. At other times we'll see the moon moon. At other times we'll see the moon has moved around the earth and we see has moved around the earth and we see has moved around the earth and we see the moon half illuminated and half dark the moon half illuminated and half dark the moon half illuminated and half dark we'd call that first quarter. At other we'd call that first quarter. At other we'd call that first quarter. At other times still when the moon has moved times still when the moon has moved times still when the moon has moved further around the earth we see the full further around the earth we see the full further around the earth we see the full illuminated face of the moon and we call illuminated face of the moon and we call illuminated face of the moon and we call that full moon. But it's just because that full moon. But it's just because that full moon. But it's just because the moon is half illuminated by the sun the moon is half illuminated by the sun the moon is half illuminated by the sun and it's our perspective on that half and it's our perspective on that half and it's our perspective on that half illuminated moon which gives the phases. illuminated moon which gives the phases. illuminated moon which gives the phases. Why doesn't the earth block the light Why doesn't the earth block the light Why doesn't the earth block the light when we're seeing a full moon? You know, when we're seeing a full moon? You know, when we're seeing a full moon? You know, if it's sun, earth, moon, why doesn't if it's sun, earth, moon, why doesn't if it's sun, earth, moon, why doesn't the earth block out the light so we the earth block out the light so we the earth block out the light so we can't see the moon? can't see the moon? can't see the moon? You would think that would happen every You would think that would happen every You would think that would happen every full moon. You would think the earth the full moon. You would think the earth the full moon. You would think the earth the moon would go through the earth's shadow moon would go through the earth's shadow moon would go through the earth's shadow at every full moon. But in fact, the at every full moon. But in fact, the at every full moon. But in fact, the moon's orbit is tilted slightly to the moon's orbit is tilted slightly to the moon's orbit is tilted slightly to the orbit of the earth around the sun. orbit of the earth around the sun. orbit of the earth around the sun. How much is it tilted? How much is it tilted? How much is it tilted? By about 5°. So virtually every full By about 5°. So virtually every full By about 5°. So virtually every full moon, the moon is moving just above or moon, the moon is moving just above or moon, the moon is moving just above or just below the Earth's shadow. I'm here just below the Earth's shadow. I'm here just below the Earth's shadow. I'm here with Andrew Jacobs at the Sydney with Andrew Jacobs at the Sydney with Andrew Jacobs at the Sydney Observatory and we've just witnessed a Observatory and we've just witnessed a Observatory and we've just witnessed a total lunar eclipse. So, can you tell me total lunar eclipse. So, can you tell me total lunar eclipse. So, can you tell me what that is? what that is? what that is? So, total lunar eclipse is when normally So, total lunar eclipse is when normally So, total lunar eclipse is when normally there would be a full moon, but the full there would be a full moon, but the full there would be a full moon, but the full moon happens when the moon is in Earth's moon happens when the moon is in Earth's moon happens when the moon is in Earth's shadow. So, the moon has passed through shadow. So, the moon has passed through shadow. So, the moon has passed through Earth's shadow. Um, it's gone through Earth's shadow. Um, it's gone through Earth's shadow. Um, it's gone through the outer fainter part of the shadow, the outer fainter part of the shadow, the outer fainter part of the shadow, gone into the inner darker part and gone into the inner darker part and gone into the inner darker part and turned red. turned red. turned red. So, why does it look red when it's in So, why does it look red when it's in So, why does it look red when it's in the middle of Earth's shadow? the middle of Earth's shadow? the middle of Earth's shadow? Ah, there's three three effects here Ah, there's three three effects here Ah, there's three three effects here going on. One is that the Earth's going on. One is that the Earth's going on. One is that the Earth's atmosphere is refracting the light into atmosphere is refracting the light into atmosphere is refracting the light into towards the moon. A second bit like a towards the moon. A second bit like a towards the moon. A second bit like a prism, is it? prism, is it? prism, is it? Bit like a prison. Yes, exactly like Bit like a prison. Yes, exactly like Bit like a prison. Yes, exactly like like that. Um it the blue light however like that. Um it the blue light however like that. Um it the blue light however is being scattered out by the Earth's is being scattered out by the Earth's is being scattered out by the Earth's atmosphere just like a sunset. You see a atmosphere just like a sunset. You see a atmosphere just like a sunset. You see a red sunset because the blue light is red sunset because the blue light is red sunset because the blue light is scattered outwards. Um so that leaves scattered outwards. Um so that leaves scattered outwards. Um so that leaves the red light preferentially to get the red light preferentially to get the red light preferentially to get through to the moon and then if there's through to the moon and then if there's through to the moon and then if there's dust perhaps volcanic dust in the dust perhaps volcanic dust in the dust perhaps volcanic dust in the earth's atmosphere that dims the light. earth's atmosphere that dims the light. earth's atmosphere that dims the light. So it um leads to either a brighter or So it um leads to either a brighter or So it um leads to either a brighter or darker red color on the face of the darker red color on the face of the darker red color on the face of the moon. moon. moon. What can we use the lunar eclipse for? What can we use the lunar eclipse for? What can we use the lunar eclipse for? Why is it important to us? Why is it important to us? Why is it important to us? A few years ago, I would have said it A few years ago, I would have said it A few years ago, I would have said it was had no importance at all. Not much was had no importance at all. Not much was had no importance at all. Not much importance anyway. Beautiful thing to importance anyway. Beautiful thing to importance anyway. Beautiful thing to look at but not much scientific look at but not much scientific look at but not much scientific importance. But nowadays um we know that importance. But nowadays um we know that importance. But nowadays um we know that there are planets orbiting around other there are planets orbiting around other there are planets orbiting around other stars, alien stars, ex exoplanets we stars, alien stars, ex exoplanets we stars, alien stars, ex exoplanets we call them. And if we can measure um the call them. And if we can measure um the call them. And if we can measure um the light that's going through Earth's light that's going through Earth's light that's going through Earth's atmosphere and reflecting off the moon, atmosphere and reflecting off the moon, atmosphere and reflecting off the moon, it can give us an idea of what we might it can give us an idea of what we might it can give us an idea of what we might expect to see if the light is coming expect to see if the light is coming expect to see if the light is coming through the atmosphere of an exoplanet through the atmosphere of an exoplanet through the atmosphere of an exoplanet orbiting around another star. So we can orbiting around another star. So we can orbiting around another star. So we can use the observations of a lunar eclipse use the observations of a lunar eclipse use the observations of a lunar eclipse around the Earth to infer what's what around the Earth to infer what's what around the Earth to infer what's what the atmosphere of a exoplanet may be the atmosphere of a exoplanet may be the atmosphere of a exoplanet may be like. We can detect things like ozone or like. We can detect things like ozone or like. We can detect things like ozone or carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere by carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere by carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere by looking at the spectrum that reflects looking at the spectrum that reflects looking at the spectrum that reflects off the moon. And if we see a similar off the moon. And if we see a similar off the moon. And if we see a similar spectrum when we look at a exoplanet spectrum when we look at a exoplanet spectrum when we look at a exoplanet around another star, we could infer around another star, we could infer around another star, we could infer there is um ozone or carbon dioxide in there is um ozone or carbon dioxide in there is um ozone or carbon dioxide in that atmosphere. that atmosphere. that atmosphere. Could you detect water vapor as well? Could you detect water vapor as well? Could you detect water vapor as well? You could detect water vapor as well. You could detect water vapor as well. You could detect water vapor as well. Yes. Yes. Yes. And that would obviously be a pretty And that would obviously be a pretty And that would obviously be a pretty exciting sign if we saw that. exciting sign if we saw that. exciting sign if we saw that. That would be a very exciting sign. Yes. That would be a very exciting sign. Yes. That would be a very exciting sign. Yes. Yes. All those things together and Yes. All those things together and Yes. All those things together and perhaps some methane as well might perhaps some methane as well might perhaps some methane as well might suggest that there's life out there in suggest that there's life out there in suggest that there's life out there in the universe.