Title: Where Did The Earth Come From
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuMjnP1YbPw

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Recently, I was in New Zealand asking Recently, I was in New Zealand asking Recently, I was in New Zealand asking the real tough questions like where did the real tough questions like where did the real tough questions like where did the earth come from? Like what was it the earth come from? Like what was it the earth come from? Like what was it before it was the earth? Like how did it before it was the earth? Like how did it before it was the earth? Like how did it get here? get here? get here? I don't want to do this anymore. I don't want to do this anymore. I don't want to do this anymore. [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] Those who were game to answer my Those who were game to answer my Those who were game to answer my question realized that an explosion was question realized that an explosion was question realized that an explosion was important to Earth's formation. important to Earth's formation. important to Earth's formation. I suppose it was created from space. I I suppose it was created from space. I I suppose it was created from space. I don't know. I don't know. Things that don't know. I don't know. Things that don't know. I don't know. Things that explode in space. explode in space. explode in space. I suppose just heaps of gas built up. I suppose just heaps of gas built up. I suppose just heaps of gas built up. Bang. God planet. Bang. God planet. Bang. God planet. Same with the sun and everything else. Same with the sun and everything else. Same with the sun and everything else. So, you're saying it came out of some So, you're saying it came out of some So, you're saying it came out of some sort? sort? sort? I'd say I'd say it would have been gas. I'd say I'd say it would have been gas. I'd say I'd say it would have been gas. Yeah. Would have been explosion. Yeah. Would have been explosion. Yeah. Would have been explosion. And then after that, there was just a And then after that, there was just a And then after that, there was just a planet there or that's that's a really planet there or that's that's a really planet there or that's that's a really good question actually. I suppose it good question actually. I suppose it good question actually. I suppose it would be a whole bunch of gases and then would be a whole bunch of gases and then would be a whole bunch of gases and then bang, a planet started evolving. All the bang, a planet started evolving. All the bang, a planet started evolving. All the gases were right. gases were right. gases were right. Was there a particular explosion you had Was there a particular explosion you had Was there a particular explosion you had in mind? Perhaps one you learned about in mind? Perhaps one you learned about in mind? Perhaps one you learned about from a popular American sitcom? from a popular American sitcom? from a popular American sitcom? From the Big Bang, maybe. Yeah, From the Big Bang, maybe. Yeah, From the Big Bang, maybe. Yeah, the Big Bang. the big bang theory or the Big Bang. the big bang theory or the Big Bang. the big bang theory or something like that. something like that. something like that. It was a bunch of dust that was formed It was a bunch of dust that was formed It was a bunch of dust that was formed during the Big Bang. during the Big Bang. during the Big Bang. I've been to a couple of um museums here I've been to a couple of um museums here I've been to a couple of um museums here in New Zealand and then it it all starts in New Zealand and then it it all starts in New Zealand and then it it all starts with the Big Bang, it says. And then you with the Big Bang, it says. And then you with the Big Bang, it says. And then you see a lot of um volcanic action. see a lot of um volcanic action. see a lot of um volcanic action. The Big Bang theory. That's one of the The Big Bang theory. That's one of the The Big Bang theory. That's one of the theories of how Earth was created. theories of how Earth was created. theories of how Earth was created. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, the Big Bang created the Earth. So, the Big Bang created the Earth. So, the Big Bang created the Earth. Yes. Yes. Yes. It was like boom and Earth was there. It was like boom and Earth was there. It was like boom and Earth was there. Now, the trouble with explosions, which Now, the trouble with explosions, which Now, the trouble with explosions, which I was trying to hint at, is that they I was trying to hint at, is that they I was trying to hint at, is that they tend to blow stuff apart. They're more tend to blow stuff apart. They're more tend to blow stuff apart. They're more destructive than constructive. But what destructive than constructive. But what destructive than constructive. But what we're looking for is a mechanism to form we're looking for is a mechanism to form we're looking for is a mechanism to form the Earth, to bring things together. So, the Earth, to bring things together. So, the Earth, to bring things together. So, how could the Earth form out of an how could the Earth form out of an how could the Earth form out of an explosion? explosion? explosion? Masses that were then clustered together Masses that were then clustered together Masses that were then clustered together and compacted together and consolidated. and compacted together and consolidated. and compacted together and consolidated. It was debris that gathered together It was debris that gathered together It was debris that gathered together through gravity. through gravity. through gravity. Okay. Where did that debris come from? Okay. Where did that debris come from? Okay. Where did that debris come from? The uh the Big Bang, I suppose. original The uh the Big Bang, I suppose. original The uh the Big Bang, I suppose. original that big explosion led to a whole bunch that big explosion led to a whole bunch that big explosion led to a whole bunch of debris and then it collapsed down of debris and then it collapsed down of debris and then it collapsed down because of gravity. because of gravity. because of gravity. Yes. Yes. Yes. Now we're on the right track. The Now we're on the right track. The Now we're on the right track. The gravitational attraction between all gravitational attraction between all gravitational attraction between all mass is what causes matter to clump mass is what causes matter to clump mass is what causes matter to clump together into galaxies, stars, and together into galaxies, stars, and together into galaxies, stars, and planets. There's only one little planets. There's only one little planets. There's only one little problem. After the Big Bang, there were problem. After the Big Bang, there were problem. After the Big Bang, there were only two elements, hydrogen, and helium only two elements, hydrogen, and helium only two elements, hydrogen, and helium in the whole universe. So, how could we in the whole universe. So, how could we in the whole universe. So, how could we form the earth including its oxygen, form the earth including its oxygen, form the earth including its oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, silicon, aluminium? I carbon, nitrogen, silicon, aluminium? I carbon, nitrogen, silicon, aluminium? I say it that way for my Australian say it that way for my Australian say it that way for my Australian viewers. How could we form all these viewers. How could we form all these viewers. How could we form all these other elements? Well, the truth is the other elements? Well, the truth is the other elements? Well, the truth is the Big Bang didn't form the Earth, at least Big Bang didn't form the Earth, at least Big Bang didn't form the Earth, at least not directly. The Big Bang formed not directly. The Big Bang formed not directly. The Big Bang formed galaxies of stars. Let's focus in on one galaxies of stars. Let's focus in on one galaxies of stars. Let's focus in on one of these stars in particular, one whose of these stars in particular, one whose of these stars in particular, one whose contents will go on to form the Earth. contents will go on to form the Earth. contents will go on to form the Earth. In this star, the lighter elements are In this star, the lighter elements are In this star, the lighter elements are fusing together to form heavier fusing together to form heavier fusing together to form heavier elements, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and elements, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and elements, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and eventually all the elements up to iron. eventually all the elements up to iron. eventually all the elements up to iron. Now, when this star runs out of nuclei Now, when this star runs out of nuclei Now, when this star runs out of nuclei to fuse, it explodes. And out of that to fuse, it explodes. And out of that to fuse, it explodes. And out of that debris could form either directly our debris could form either directly our debris could form either directly our solar system or another star, which then solar system or another star, which then solar system or another star, which then explodes and forms our solar system. So, explodes and forms our solar system. So, explodes and forms our solar system. So, you could say the sun is a second or you could say the sun is a second or you could say the sun is a second or third generation star. And you might third generation star. And you might third generation star. And you might say, well, that would have taken a very say, well, that would have taken a very say, well, that would have taken a very long time to occur. And it's true. The long time to occur. And it's true. The long time to occur. And it's true. The Earth has been around for about 4 1/2 Earth has been around for about 4 1/2 Earth has been around for about 4 1/2 billion years, but the Big Bang happened billion years, but the Big Bang happened billion years, but the Big Bang happened 13.7 billion years ago. So, if my arms 13.7 billion years ago. So, if my arms 13.7 billion years ago. So, if my arms span represents the time that the Earth span represents the time that the Earth span represents the time that the Earth has been here, then the Big Bang would has been here, then the Big Bang would has been here, then the Big Bang would be about here. be about here. be about here. You're doing a bangup job, guys. So, You're doing a bangup job, guys. So, You're doing a bangup job, guys. So, when people tell you that we're all made when people tell you that we're all made when people tell you that we're all made of stardust, they're not trying to be of stardust, they're not trying to be of stardust, they're not trying to be metaphorical or poetic necessarily. metaphorical or poetic necessarily. metaphorical or poetic necessarily. They're being literal. The iron in your They're being literal. The iron in your They're being literal. The iron in your blood was actually formed in the core of blood was actually formed in the core of blood was actually formed in the core of a star at millions of degrees. We and a star at millions of degrees. We and a star at millions of degrees. We and the world around us can only exist the world around us can only exist the world around us can only exist because of the elements that were formed because of the elements that were formed because of the elements that were formed in earlier stars.