Title: Which Hits The Ground First
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oBdalzRJR5g

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Now, I'd like you to make a prediction. Now, I'd like you to make a prediction. Now, I'd like you to make a prediction. In my left hand, I have a basketball. In In my left hand, I have a basketball. In In my left hand, I have a basketball. In my right hand, a 5 kg medicine ball. If my right hand, a 5 kg medicine ball. If my right hand, a 5 kg medicine ball. If I hold them both above my head and then I hold them both above my head and then I hold them both above my head and then let them go simultaneously, let them go simultaneously, let them go simultaneously, which one will hit the ground first? which one will hit the ground first? which one will hit the ground first? 6 years ago here at the University of 6 years ago here at the University of 6 years ago here at the University of Sydney, I did an experiment very similar Sydney, I did an experiment very similar Sydney, I did an experiment very similar to this where I handed out a heavy to this where I handed out a heavy to this where I handed out a heavy object and a light object and I asked object and a light object and I asked object and a light object and I asked which one would hit the ground first. which one would hit the ground first. which one would hit the ground first. Tell me which one's going to hit the Tell me which one's going to hit the Tell me which one's going to hit the ground first. I'm going to put my money ground first. I'm going to put my money ground first. I'm going to put my money on the black fella. on the black fella. on the black fella. What's your heart telling you? What's your heart telling you? What's your heart telling you? I reckon it's going to drop faster. I reckon it's going to drop faster. I reckon it's going to drop faster. I want the black one as well. Yeah, I'll I want the black one as well. Yeah, I'll I want the black one as well. Yeah, I'll go. go. go. Okay. Okay. Okay. This one go faster and hit the ground This one go faster and hit the ground This one go faster and hit the ground fast. fast. fast. This one. This one. This one. You going to pick that one? You going to pick that one? You going to pick that one? What's your feeling about that one? How What's your feeling about that one? How What's your feeling about that one? How does it compare to the does it compare to the does it compare to the Well, it's a lot heavier and I just feel Well, it's a lot heavier and I just feel Well, it's a lot heavier and I just feel like the weight is, you know, pulling it like the weight is, you know, pulling it like the weight is, you know, pulling it down. You know, the more weight it's the down. You know, the more weight it's the down. You know, the more weight it's the faster it's going to fall to the ground. faster it's going to fall to the ground. faster it's going to fall to the ground. The the forces are more on that ball The the forces are more on that ball The the forces are more on that ball than this one. You can definitely tell than this one. You can definitely tell than this one. You can definitely tell the difference. I mean, I go to the gym the difference. I mean, I go to the gym the difference. I mean, I go to the gym like 7 days a [laughter] week, but I like 7 days a [laughter] week, but I like 7 days a [laughter] week, but I still feel it. I can still feel it. still feel it. I can still feel it. still feel it. I can still feel it. Well, that one feels like it could Well, that one feels like it could Well, that one feels like it could almost go up where this one almost go up where this one almost go up where this one got it's got air in it. So, the lifting got it's got air in it. So, the lifting got it's got air in it. So, the lifting up as opposed to this one being pulled up as opposed to this one being pulled up as opposed to this one being pulled down down down now. I think now you're coming back to now. I think now you're coming back to now. I think now you're coming back to me. I'm thinking basketball now. me. I'm thinking basketball now. me. I'm thinking basketball now. What's making you think basketball? Cuz What's making you think basketball? Cuz What's making you think basketball? Cuz you're coming back to me. you're coming back to me. you're coming back to me. Sure. Sure. Sure. I'm just saying like I'm just saying like I'm just saying like you know I'm I'm going to stay. You you know I'm I'm going to stay. You you know I'm I'm going to stay. You can't corrupt me. I'm going to stay can't corrupt me. I'm going to stay can't corrupt me. I'm going to stay solid on the black. solid on the black. solid on the black. All right, let's actually do this thing. All right, let's actually do this thing. All right, let's actually do this thing. So, do you want to do you want to hook So, do you want to do you want to hook So, do you want to do you want to hook us up as high as you can? And the key is us up as high as you can? And the key is us up as high as you can? And the key is to be as simultaneous as you can. to be as simultaneous as you can. to be as simultaneous as you can. All right. Are you ready? You want to All right. Are you ready? You want to All right. Are you ready? You want to count it down? Yeah. Three, two, one. count it down? Yeah. Three, two, one. count it down? Yeah. Three, two, one. Exactly. [laughter] Oh, Exactly. [laughter] Oh, Exactly. [laughter] Oh, three, two, one. Yes, we did it. Yes, we did it. Yes, we did it. What did you think happened? What did you think happened? What did you think happened? I thought the black one went first. I thought the black one went first. I thought the black one went first. You thought the black one landed first. You thought the black one landed first. You thought the black one landed first. We We'd have to go to the tape. [music] What did you see? What did you see? What did you see? Uh, they look like they pretty much Uh, they look like they pretty much Uh, they look like they pretty much landed at the same time. landed at the same time. landed at the same time. Same. They hit the ground at the same Same. They hit the ground at the same Same. They hit the ground at the same time. time. time. Oh, I thought it was very close. It's Oh, I thought it was very close. It's Oh, I thought it was very close. It's probably just a beast it. probably just a beast it. probably just a beast it. It's cuz it's not It's not a very high It's cuz it's not It's not a very high It's cuz it's not It's not a very high distance, so they haven't really reached distance, so they haven't really reached distance, so they haven't really reached their maximum velocity yet. their maximum velocity yet. their maximum velocity yet. Well, the black ball just didn't reach Well, the black ball just didn't reach Well, the black ball just didn't reach terminal velocity. Wasn't enough time terminal velocity. Wasn't enough time terminal velocity. Wasn't enough time for it to fall. for it to fall. for it to fall. I would thought it' be like all the I would thought it' be like all the I would thought it' be like all the different variables like um so like that different variables like um so like that different variables like um so like that one had to like break more one had to like break more one had to like break more air, whatever. air, whatever. air, whatever. Break more air, Break more air, Break more air, you know? you know? you know? The answer is although the force of The answer is although the force of The answer is although the force of gravity on the black ball is greater, it gravity on the black ball is greater, it gravity on the black ball is greater, it has a greater mass and therefore greater has a greater mass and therefore greater has a greater mass and therefore greater inertia. So it requires more force to inertia. So it requires more force to inertia. So it requires more force to accelerate it. There's less accelerate it. There's less accelerate it. There's less gravitational force on the basketball. gravitational force on the basketball. gravitational force on the basketball. But because its mass is lower, it has But because its mass is lower, it has But because its mass is lower, it has less inertia and therefore requires less less inertia and therefore requires less less inertia and therefore requires less force to accelerate it at the same rate force to accelerate it at the same rate force to accelerate it at the same rate as the medicine ball. Let's give it a as the medicine ball. Let's give it a as the medicine ball. Let's give it a try. Three, two, one.