Title: Why Are Astronauts Weightless
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iQOHRKKNNLQ

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Have you wondered what it would be like Have you wondered what it would be like Have you wondered what it would be like to be an astronaut floating around in to be an astronaut floating around in to be an astronaut floating around in the space station? the space station? the space station? But why are the astronauts floating? But why are the astronauts floating? But why are the astronauts floating? I'm here at the Powerhouse Museum in I'm here at the Powerhouse Museum in I'm here at the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney to find out if anyone knows the Sydney to find out if anyone knows the Sydney to find out if anyone knows the answer. Why are they floating? answer. Why are they floating? answer. Why are they floating? No gravity. No gravity. No gravity. No gravity. No gravity. No gravity. Zero gravity. Zero gravity. Zero gravity. There's no gravity. There's no gravity. There's no gravity. There's no gravity. There's no gravity. There's no gravity. Gravity. The stuff that holds us to the Gravity. The stuff that holds us to the Gravity. The stuff that holds us to the planet when we spin doesn't happen up planet when we spin doesn't happen up planet when we spin doesn't happen up there. there. there. Gravity holds you the answer in space. Gravity holds you the answer in space. Gravity holds you the answer in space. There's nothing there. So, you just There's nothing there. So, you just There's nothing there. So, you just float. float. float. There's no gravity in space. There's no gravity in space. There's no gravity in space. No gravity. There's very little. No gravity. There's very little. No gravity. There's very little. But is there really no gravity in space? But is there really no gravity in space? But is there really no gravity in space? After all, the moon orbits the Earth due After all, the moon orbits the Earth due After all, the moon orbits the Earth due to gravitational attraction. to gravitational attraction. to gravitational attraction. So, where would the space station fit in So, where would the space station fit in So, where would the space station fit in this picture? [music] this picture? [music] this picture? [music] Can you make me a roughly to scale model Can you make me a roughly to scale model Can you make me a roughly to scale model of the Earth and the Moon? And then of the Earth and the Moon? And then of the Earth and the Moon? And then we're going to position the space we're going to position the space we're going to position the space station in there. So about like that. station in there. So about like that. station in there. So about like that. Yeah. About there. Yeah. About there. Yeah. About there. Close up. Maybe about there. That. Close up. Maybe about there. That. Close up. Maybe about there. That. You ready to see the real distance? You ready to see the real distance? You ready to see the real distance? What do you reckon? [laughter] [laughter] [laughter] Oh, okay. It's actually about here. Maybe a little It's actually about here. Maybe a little It's actually about here. Maybe a little further. further. further. I think we were wrong. I think we were wrong. I think we were wrong. Now, if the moon is here and the Earth Now, if the moon is here and the Earth Now, if the moon is here and the Earth is there, whereabouts would you put the is there, whereabouts would you put the is there, whereabouts would you put the space station? Somewhere around here. space station? Somewhere around here. space station? Somewhere around here. Further here. Further here. Further here. Midway. Midway. Midway. About halfway. About halfway. About halfway. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right about here. So that's maybe like a Right about here. So that's maybe like a Right about here. So that's maybe like a quarter of the distance to the moon. Let quarter of the distance to the moon. Let quarter of the distance to the moon. Let me show you the real distance. Are you me show you the real distance. Are you me show you the real distance. Are you ready for the real distance? ready for the real distance? ready for the real distance? The space station is right about there. The space station is right about there. The space station is right about there. That close. That close. That close. Oh, okay. That close. Wow. [laughter] Oh, okay. That close. Wow. [laughter] Oh, okay. That close. Wow. [laughter] We're not good at this game. We're not good at this game. We're not good at this game. We're not. We're not. We're not. The space station is actually only about The space station is actually only about The space station is actually only about 400 km away. So if you're in Sydney, 400 km away. So if you're in Sydney, 400 km away. So if you're in Sydney, it's a little further than the drive to it's a little further than the drive to it's a little further than the drive to CRA. But does it make sense [music] that CRA. But does it make sense [music] that CRA. But does it make sense [music] that the Earth exerts a big gravitational the Earth exerts a big gravitational the Earth exerts a big gravitational force on you, but nothing on the force on you, but nothing on the force on you, but nothing on the astronauts just a short distance away? astronauts just a short distance away? astronauts just a short distance away? You reckon there'd be no gravity there? You reckon there'd be no gravity there? You reckon there'd be no gravity there? There's not much. They float. We've seen There's not much. They float. We've seen There's not much. They float. We've seen them. them. them. Well, clearly there's not. They're Well, clearly there's not. They're Well, clearly there's not. They're floating around. floating around. floating around. I know they float. And the question is I know they float. And the question is I know they float. And the question is why? why? why? No idea. No idea. No idea. I'm really confused. I'm really confused. I'm really confused. Well, in truth, the force on the Well, in truth, the force on the Well, in truth, the force on the astronauts is almost as much as the astronauts is almost as much as the astronauts is almost as much as the force on you. force on you. force on you. So then why are they floating while So then why are they floating while So then why are they floating while you're stuck here? The answer is the you're stuck here? The answer is the you're stuck here? The answer is the astronauts aren't floating, they're astronauts aren't floating, they're astronauts aren't floating, they're falling. falling. falling. [screaming] [screaming] [screaming] And not only that, but the space station And not only that, but the space station And not only that, but the space station they're in is falling as well. So why doesn't the space station come So why doesn't the space station come So why doesn't the space station come crashing into the Earth? Well, the crashing into the Earth? Well, the crashing into the Earth? Well, the reason is the space station and reason is the space station and reason is the space station and astronauts inside have this huge astronauts inside have this huge astronauts inside have this huge sideways velocity of about 28,000 kmh. sideways velocity of about 28,000 kmh. sideways velocity of about 28,000 kmh. So even though they're falling towards So even though they're falling towards So even though they're falling towards the Earth, they're going so fast that as the Earth, they're going so fast that as the Earth, they're going so fast that as they fall towards the Earth's surface, they fall towards the Earth's surface, they fall towards the Earth's surface, it curves away from them. it curves away from them. it curves away from them. If the Earth didn't put a gravitational If the Earth didn't put a gravitational If the Earth didn't put a gravitational force on them, they would fly out into force on them, they would fly out into force on them, they would fly out into space. space. space. Sure. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. Sure. Yeah. Right. So, it's due to that Right. So, it's due to that Right. So, it's due to that gravitational pull that they can gravitational pull that they can gravitational pull that they can actually keep orbiting the Earth. actually keep orbiting the Earth. actually keep orbiting the Earth. If it was to stop moving, it would be If it was to stop moving, it would be If it was to stop moving, it would be plummeting. Exactly. plummeting. Exactly. plummeting. Exactly. But would they But would they But would they They would still feel weightless until They would still feel weightless until They would still feel weightless until you smash into something. you smash into something. you smash into something. So, the space station and the astronauts So, the space station and the astronauts So, the space station and the astronauts inside are constantly accelerating inside are constantly accelerating inside are constantly accelerating towards the Earth's core, but they never towards the Earth's core, but they never towards the Earth's core, but they never get any closer. And because they're get any closer. And because they're get any closer. And because they're accelerating at the same rate, the accelerating at the same rate, the accelerating at the same rate, the astronauts feel weightless. They have astronauts feel weightless. They have astronauts feel weightless. They have this amazing sensation of floating.