Title: Why Does The Earth Spin
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQxeutcYP6I

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en So, I'm down in West Vancouver, British So, I'm down in West Vancouver, British So, I'm down in West Vancouver, British Columbia, which is where I grew up. And Columbia, which is where I grew up. And Columbia, which is where I grew up. And uh at the local beach, there is this 2 uh at the local beach, there is this 2 uh at the local beach, there is this 2 and 1/2 ton granite sphere that was made and 1/2 ton granite sphere that was made and 1/2 ton granite sphere that was made to have a tolerance of 200ths of a to have a tolerance of 200ths of a to have a tolerance of 200ths of a millimeter. This is an amazing uh millimeter. This is an amazing uh millimeter. This is an amazing uh granite sphere, and it's floated on a granite sphere, and it's floated on a granite sphere, and it's floated on a thin layer of water. And it just thin layer of water. And it just thin layer of water. And it just presents an amazing opportunity to study presents an amazing opportunity to study presents an amazing opportunity to study inertia. And that's why I'm down here to inertia. And that's why I'm down here to inertia. And that's why I'm down here to have a chat with uh with some of the have a chat with uh with some of the have a chat with uh with some of the people going by about why the globe people going by about why the globe people going by about why the globe spins and in fact why the earth spins. spins and in fact why the earth spins. spins and in fact why the earth spins. Why does the earth spin? Why does it Why does the earth spin? Why does it Why does the earth spin? Why does it turn like that? Um I think it's the turn like that? Um I think it's the turn like that? Um I think it's the gravity for it to keep us down on the gravity for it to keep us down on the gravity for it to keep us down on the ground. Is that right? ground. Is that right? ground. Is that right? Gravitational pull. Gravitational pull. Gravitational pull. How does that cause the earth to spin? How does that cause the earth to spin? How does that cause the earth to spin? Again, my basic science fails. It's Again, my basic science fails. It's Again, my basic science fails. It's fails. Gravity. I he he guesses, you fails. Gravity. I he he guesses, you fails. Gravity. I he he guesses, you know, looking. know, looking. know, looking. Gravity. Oh, yeah. Gravity. Gravity. Oh, yeah. Gravity. Gravity. Oh, yeah. Gravity. [Music] [Music] [Music] It's not stopping. Would you agree with It's not stopping. Would you agree with It's not stopping. Would you agree with me? me? me? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, why is that? So, why is that? So, why is that? Some sort of force. That's Some sort of force. That's Some sort of force. That's You think there's a force down there You think there's a force down there You think there's a force down there pushing it? pushing it? pushing it? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm going to go cuz the up thrust from I'm going to go cuz the up thrust from I'm going to go cuz the up thrust from the water is probably angled in such a the water is probably angled in such a the water is probably angled in such a way that it's because it's a spherical way that it's because it's a spherical way that it's because it's a spherical shape, it's probably pushing on it at an shape, it's probably pushing on it at an shape, it's probably pushing on it at an angle, so it spins constantly. angle, so it spins constantly. angle, so it spins constantly. Yes. What is the centrifugal force that Yes. What is the centrifugal force that Yes. What is the centrifugal force that keeps it keeps it going? What is that keeps it keeps it going? What is that keeps it keeps it going? What is that force? Where does that force come from? force? Where does that force come from? force? Where does that force come from? Is there a force that keeps it going? Is Is there a force that keeps it going? Is Is there a force that keeps it going? Is there a force pushing it around there a force pushing it around there a force pushing it around within within uh within the earth's within within uh within the earth's within within uh within the earth's core? Is there not something that drives core? Is there not something that drives core? Is there not something that drives and dictates said centrifugal force? Guess it's the law of inertia, isn't it? Guess it's the law of inertia, isn't it? Guess it's the law of inertia, isn't it? What's the law of inertia? What's the law of inertia? What's the law of inertia? Every action pos equal and opposite Every action pos equal and opposite Every action pos equal and opposite reaction. The force of inertia maintains this um The force of inertia maintains this um The force of inertia maintains this um but inertia which is a great idea is not but inertia which is a great idea is not but inertia which is a great idea is not a force. a force. a force. How would you define? How would you define? How would you define? It's just the tendency of all objects It's just the tendency of all objects It's just the tendency of all objects with mass to maintain their state of with mass to maintain their state of with mass to maintain their state of motion. motion. motion. Okay. Okay. Okay. So if they're stationary they want to So if they're stationary they want to So if they're stationary they want to stay stationary stay stationary stay stationary if we anthropomorphize them. if we anthropomorphize them. if we anthropomorphize them. Yes. And if they're moving said Yes. And if they're moving said Yes. And if they're moving said anthropomorphized objects want to want anthropomorphized objects want to want anthropomorphized objects want to want to keep moving to keep moving to keep moving keep moving. Basically whatever motion keep moving. Basically whatever motion keep moving. Basically whatever motion they have they like to continue in that they have they like to continue in that they have they like to continue in that state of motion. The earth does that state of motion. The earth does that state of motion. The earth does that without any forces. This does that without any forces. This does that without any forces. This does that without any forces. without any forces. without any forces. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. [Music]