Title: Why Does the Moon Orbit Earth
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zN6kCa6xi9k

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Now tell me what does the moon do? Now tell me what does the moon do? Now tell me what does the moon do? Uh the moon orbits the earth. I know Uh the moon orbits the earth. I know Uh the moon orbits the earth. I know it's like let's let's do an orbit. Can it's like let's let's do an orbit. Can it's like let's let's do an orbit. Can we do an orbit? we do an orbit? we do an orbit? Okay. So go like this. I'm guessing I'm Okay. So go like this. I'm guessing I'm Okay. So go like this. I'm guessing I'm guessing around and around guessing around and around guessing around and around if you will. You spinning it. You spinning it. You spinning it. Are you going to Are you going to Are you going to Doesn't it stay? Isn't it kind of like Doesn't it stay? Isn't it kind of like Doesn't it stay? Isn't it kind of like the same face is facing the whole time? the same face is facing the whole time? the same face is facing the whole time? Right. So, Right. So, Right. So, kind of. But kind of. But kind of. But should I be doing like should I be doing like should I be doing like You have to twist it as well. You have to twist it as well. You have to twist it as well. You have to twist it a little bit as it You have to twist it a little bit as it You have to twist it a little bit as it goes around. goes around. goes around. That's it. Exactly. That's it. Exactly. That's it. Exactly. Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure. Booyah. Booyah. Booyah. All right. Now, I want to know why the All right. Now, I want to know why the All right. Now, I want to know why the moon does that. moon does that. moon does that. Um, was it the gravitational pull of the Um, was it the gravitational pull of the Um, was it the gravitational pull of the Earth? Cuz it's like a floaty rock in Earth? Cuz it's like a floaty rock in Earth? Cuz it's like a floaty rock in space and the Earth goes, "Come here." space and the Earth goes, "Come here." space and the Earth goes, "Come here." But then doesn't ever come there. It But then doesn't ever come there. It But then doesn't ever come there. It just kind of goes around and round and just kind of goes around and round and just kind of goes around and round and round. The Earth puts a gravitational round. The Earth puts a gravitational round. The Earth puts a gravitational force on the moon. The two graval masses force on the moon. The two graval masses force on the moon. The two graval masses because you've got the Earth's gravity, because you've got the Earth's gravity, because you've got the Earth's gravity, it being the greater object, is pulling it being the greater object, is pulling it being the greater object, is pulling the uh the moon's size uh into its the uh the moon's size uh into its the uh the moon's size uh into its orbit. orbit. orbit. It's obviously got some kind of It's obviously got some kind of It's obviously got some kind of attraction to the Earth. attraction to the Earth. attraction to the Earth. What kind of attraction? What kind of attraction? What kind of attraction? Are we gravitational? I'm guessing. Are we gravitational? I'm guessing. Are we gravitational? I'm guessing. I mean, I'm just trying to check it. I mean, I'm just trying to check it. I mean, I'm just trying to check it. You're telling me that the moon is You're telling me that the moon is You're telling me that the moon is attracted to the Earth? attracted to the Earth? attracted to the Earth? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah, Yeah, Yeah, I guess so. Yeah, but it keeps spinning I guess so. Yeah, but it keeps spinning I guess so. Yeah, but it keeps spinning around cuz it's moving at a certain around cuz it's moving at a certain around cuz it's moving at a certain speed. So, it never actually reaches the speed. So, it never actually reaches the speed. So, it never actually reaches the Earth. It just keeps going.