Title: Why Is Ice Slippery
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Stx6kLd9dYI

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en Why is ice slippery? Why is ice slippery? Why is ice slippery? Ice slippery? Oh, I don't know. I Ice slippery? Oh, I don't know. I Ice slippery? Oh, I don't know. I couldn't tell you that. Um, but you couldn't tell you that. Um, but you couldn't tell you that. Um, but you skate on it. skate on it. skate on it. I skate on it, but uh I skate on it, but uh I skate on it, but uh you know that it feels pretty slippery, you know that it feels pretty slippery, you know that it feels pretty slippery, doesn't it? doesn't it? doesn't it? It does feel slippery, but you would It does feel slippery, but you would It does feel slippery, but you would feel a different slipperiness to me feel a different slipperiness to me feel a different slipperiness to me because I skate for a living. because I skate for a living. because I skate for a living. Uhhuh. Uhhuh. Uhhuh. Because the the ratio Because the the ratio Because the the ratio ratio of ratio of ratio of friction versus air on water, frozen friction versus air on water, frozen friction versus air on water, frozen water. water. water. So, I'm here on an ice rink in uh So, I'm here on an ice rink in uh So, I'm here on an ice rink in uh Sydney, and I've been asking people, Sydney, and I've been asking people, Sydney, and I've been asking people, "Why is ice slippery?" Now, a lot of "Why is ice slippery?" Now, a lot of "Why is ice slippery?" Now, a lot of them kind of have the right idea. They them kind of have the right idea. They them kind of have the right idea. They say there's a layer of water on top of say there's a layer of water on top of say there's a layer of water on top of the ice, but they don't know why. They the ice, but they don't know why. They the ice, but they don't know why. They think it's just because the sun's out or think it's just because the sun's out or think it's just because the sun's out or because it's warm in Sydney and the ice because it's warm in Sydney and the ice because it's warm in Sydney and the ice melts. So, I wanted to know why ice is melts. So, I wanted to know why ice is melts. So, I wanted to know why ice is slippery. slippery. slippery. Where the freezing meets the um less Where the freezing meets the um less Where the freezing meets the um less than freezing state, it becomes a than freezing state, it becomes a than freezing state, it becomes a liquid. So, it's the liquid on top of liquid. So, it's the liquid on top of liquid. So, it's the liquid on top of the the frozen state that makes it the the frozen state that makes it the the frozen state that makes it slippery slippery slippery because it gets wet. because it gets wet. because it gets wet. Because it gets wet. But I mean, like Because it gets wet. But I mean, like Because it gets wet. But I mean, like down here, it's not so wet, right? down here, it's not so wet, right? down here, it's not so wet, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's not. No, it's not. No, it's not. Well, isn't it I mean, that's not It's Well, isn't it I mean, that's not It's Well, isn't it I mean, that's not It's pretty frozen. pretty frozen. pretty frozen. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But it's still slippery here. But it's still slippery here. But it's still slippery here. The water, for instance, on here will The water, for instance, on here will The water, for instance, on here will lubricate and you'll have a better lubricate and you'll have a better lubricate and you'll have a better sliding surface than you will with the sliding surface than you will with the sliding surface than you will with the dry ice. dry ice. dry ice. It's like lubrication or something. I It's like lubrication or something. I It's like lubrication or something. I don't know. lubrication don't know. lubrication don't know. lubrication because the sun has heated up the ice because the sun has heated up the ice because the sun has heated up the ice which causes it to melt. The water which causes it to melt. The water which causes it to melt. The water particles become unstable on the top, particles become unstable on the top, particles become unstable on the top, widen, causes it to be wet. widen, causes it to be wet. widen, causes it to be wet. But would the ice be slippery even if But would the ice be slippery even if But would the ice be slippery even if there was no sun? there was no sun? there was no sun? Uh, depends on the actual heat. It's not Uh, depends on the actual heat. It's not Uh, depends on the actual heat. It's not the sun's rays that does it. It's the the sun's rays that does it. It's the the sun's rays that does it. It's the actual temperature. The real reason is actual temperature. The real reason is actual temperature. The real reason is when you step on the ice, you compress when you step on the ice, you compress when you step on the ice, you compress it a bit and that decreases its melting it a bit and that decreases its melting it a bit and that decreases its melting point. And so we get a thin layer of point. And so we get a thin layer of point. And so we get a thin layer of water that you can glide along. That's water that you can glide along. That's water that you can glide along. That's what makes ice slippery. what makes ice slippery. what makes ice slippery. If you were to slide on your belly or If you were to slide on your belly or If you were to slide on your belly or across the water bit, you'd obviously across the water bit, you'd obviously across the water bit, you'd obviously get very wet, but you'd slide a lot get very wet, but you'd slide a lot get very wet, but you'd slide a lot further than you would on the dry further than you would on the dry further than you would on the dry section here. section here. section here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Have you tried that? Have you tried that? Have you tried that? In Brisbane during the pack down of the In Brisbane during the pack down of the In Brisbane during the pack down of the event, um I took uh one of our event, um I took uh one of our event, um I took uh one of our inflatable tubes and I didn't think I inflatable tubes and I didn't think I inflatable tubes and I didn't think I was going to get very far, but because was going to get very far, but because was going to get very far, but because the ice was melting, I managed to slide the ice was melting, I managed to slide the ice was melting, I managed to slide 60 m. 60 m. 60 m. Wow. uh from a from a 10 yard run up, I Wow. uh from a from a 10 yard run up, I Wow. uh from a from a 10 yard run up, I slid 60 meters the whole way across the slid 60 meters the whole way across the slid 60 meters the whole way across the rink. rink. rink. That's pretty impressive. That's pretty impressive. That's pretty impressive. I was I was very happy with that. I I was I was very happy with that. I I was I was very happy with that. I didn't I didn't think I was going to get didn't I didn't think I was going to get didn't I didn't think I was going to get that far. that far. that far. But it doesn't actually have to be warm But it doesn't actually have to be warm But it doesn't actually have to be warm out. It can be freezing cold out and you out. It can be freezing cold out and you out. It can be freezing cold out and you still get the same slippery effect still get the same slippery effect still get the same slippery effect because it's based on pressure, not the because it's based on pressure, not the because it's based on pressure, not the temperature of the outside air. You're a bad skater. You're a bad skater. You're a bad skater. I'm a bad skater. I'm a bad skater. I'm a bad skater. Yeah. You want to go? Let's have a race. Yeah. You want to go? Let's have a race. Yeah. You want to go? Let's have a race. No. No. No. You want to race me? No. You want to race me? No. You want to race me? No. Let's go.