Title: World's First Electric Generator
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqdOyxJZj0U

WEBVTT Kind: captions Language: en [Applause] [Applause] [Applause] I have a pipe. I have a pipe. I have a pipe. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Do you want to hold it? Do you know what Do you want to hold it? Do you know what Do you want to hold it? Do you know what it's made of? it's made of? it's made of? Metal. Metal. Metal. Is it brass? Is it brass? Is it brass? Copper. Copper. Copper. Copper. Copper. Copper. Is copper magnetic? Is copper magnetic? Is copper magnetic? No. No. No. Uh-oh. Uh-oh. Uh-oh. I'm going to go no. I didn't think it I'm going to go no. I didn't think it I'm going to go no. I didn't think it was. Go. was. Go. was. Go. I'm going to go yes. I'm going to go yes. I'm going to go yes. Well, why don't we check this is a Well, why don't we check this is a Well, why don't we check this is a magnet. magnet. magnet. And I'd like you to use it to test And I'd like you to use it to test And I'd like you to use it to test whether the copper is is magnetic. whether the copper is is magnetic. whether the copper is is magnetic. No. No. No. I want you to be 100% sure here. I want you to be 100% sure here. I want you to be 100% sure here. What do you think? No, What do you think? No, What do you think? No, it's not magnetic. it's not magnetic. it's not magnetic. I said so. I said so. I said so. Okay. Okay. Okay. Is there anything in there? Is there anything in there? Is there anything in there? No. No. No. What do you see in there? What do you see in there? What do you see in there? That's nothing. That's nothing. That's nothing. So, why don't we drop something through So, why don't we drop something through So, why don't we drop something through it and just make sure it's empty, right? it and just make sure it's empty, right? it and just make sure it's empty, right? Okay. This is not a magnet. So, this Okay. This is not a magnet. So, this Okay. This is not a magnet. So, this isn't a magnet, but let's see what isn't a magnet, but let's see what isn't a magnet, but let's see what happens when we drop it through. That was a dull experiment, wasn't it? That was a dull experiment, wasn't it? That was a dull experiment, wasn't it? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yes. Okay. So, what's going to happen if we Okay. So, what's going to happen if we Okay. So, what's going to happen if we drop this magnet down the pipe? Going to drop this magnet down the pipe? Going to drop this magnet down the pipe? Going to pull first. Pull. pull first. Pull. pull first. Pull. Let's do it. Three, two, one. That was weird. That was weird. That was weird. That's well cool. Do it longer. Do it longer. Do it longer. What's slowing the magnet down? What's slowing the magnet down? What's slowing the magnet down? It's got to be magnetic poles or It's got to be magnetic poles or It's got to be magnetic poles or something. I don't know. North, south. something. I don't know. North, south. something. I don't know. North, south. Something to do with the polarity of the Something to do with the polarity of the Something to do with the polarity of the north and the south poles. north and the south poles. north and the south poles. But it doesn't stick. But then it's not But it doesn't stick. But then it's not But it doesn't stick. But then it's not magnetic, so it shouldn't do anything, magnetic, so it shouldn't do anything, magnetic, so it shouldn't do anything, right? You guys saw that. right? You guys saw that. right? You guys saw that. That is slightly magnetic on the inside That is slightly magnetic on the inside That is slightly magnetic on the inside somehow. somehow. somehow. It's going to be magnetic inside, isn't It's going to be magnetic inside, isn't It's going to be magnetic inside, isn't it? Or something. it? Or something. it? Or something. [Laughter] Does it like Does it like Does it like kind of seals? kind of seals? kind of seals? I think it's the powers of the universe. I think it's the powers of the universe. I think it's the powers of the universe. I don't know. I don't know why it's I don't know. I don't know why it's I don't know. I don't know why it's doing it. doing it. doing it. Well, this is what's exciting is only a Well, this is what's exciting is only a Well, this is what's exciting is only a few blocks from here was the lab of a few blocks from here was the lab of a few blocks from here was the lab of a guy called Faraday. In October 1831, he guy called Faraday. In October 1831, he guy called Faraday. In October 1831, he built the world's first electric built the world's first electric built the world's first electric generator here. A magnet which you push generator here. A magnet which you push generator here. A magnet which you push and pull in a coil to generate electric and pull in a coil to generate electric and pull in a coil to generate electric current. current. current. So that's the actual So that's the actual So that's the actual Yeah. world's first electric generator. Yeah. world's first electric generator. Yeah. world's first electric generator. And there's a permanent magnet in the And there's a permanent magnet in the And there's a permanent magnet in the middle. middle. middle. There's a permanent magnet. Yeah. There's a permanent magnet. Yeah. There's a permanent magnet. Yeah. It was Faraday who realized that it's a It was Faraday who realized that it's a It was Faraday who realized that it's a changing magnetic field that actually changing magnetic field that actually changing magnetic field that actually can generate electric current. So, as can generate electric current. So, as can generate electric current. So, as the magnet is falling through the pipe, the magnet is falling through the pipe, the magnet is falling through the pipe, it's creating a changing magnetic field it's creating a changing magnetic field it's creating a changing magnetic field that generates little electric currents, that generates little electric currents, that generates little electric currents, so-called eddiurrens in the pipe, and so-called eddiurrens in the pipe, and so-called eddiurrens in the pipe, and they create an opposing magnetic force they create an opposing magnetic force they create an opposing magnetic force on the magnet, slowing it down. So, it actually turns the pipe into a an So, it actually turns the pipe into a an So, it actually turns the pipe into a an electromagnet. electromagnet. electromagnet. I see. I see. I see. Which pushes the magnet up. And this is Which pushes the magnet up. And this is Which pushes the magnet up. And this is what's known as electromagnetic what's known as electromagnetic what's known as electromagnetic induction. So, it causes my LED to light up there. So, it causes my LED to light up there. So, it causes my LED to light up there. But it's important that you move the But it's important that you move the But it's important that you move the magnet quickly because if you move it magnet quickly because if you move it magnet quickly because if you move it too slowly, the magnetic field is not too slowly, the magnetic field is not too slowly, the magnetic field is not changing fast enough to generate enough changing fast enough to generate enough changing fast enough to generate enough voltage to light this LED. This is voltage to light this LED. This is voltage to light this LED. This is actually the way all electricity is actually the way all electricity is actually the way all electricity is generated. generated. generated. Is it? Is it? Is it? Yeah. You move a magnet near a conductor Yeah. You move a magnet near a conductor Yeah. You move a magnet near a conductor and it creates electric current. But and it creates electric current. But and it creates electric current. But where is this electrical energy coming where is this electrical energy coming where is this electrical energy coming from? You can't get energy for nothing. from? You can't get energy for nothing. from? You can't get energy for nothing. Well, Faraday realized that there must Well, Faraday realized that there must Well, Faraday realized that there must be a force pushing back on the magnet. be a force pushing back on the magnet. be a force pushing back on the magnet. It's the same force that slows this It's the same force that slows this It's the same force that slows this magnet down as it falls through the magnet down as it falls through the magnet down as it falls through the pipe. So there's actually energy being pipe. So there's actually energy being pipe. So there's actually energy being converted from gravitational potential converted from gravitational potential converted from gravitational potential energy into electrical energy and energy into electrical energy and energy into electrical energy and eventually to heat. So this pipe is eventually to heat. So this pipe is eventually to heat. So this pipe is warming up by taking some of the energy warming up by taking some of the energy warming up by taking some of the energy out of the falling magnet. out of the falling magnet. out of the falling magnet. Is that any good or what? Is that any good or what? Is that any good or what? Oh, it's very good. Oh, it's very good. Oh, it's very good. This way. And these currents coming This way. And these currents coming This way. And these currents coming around this way will induce a magnetic around this way will induce a magnetic around this way will induce a magnetic field pushing in the opposite direction. field pushing in the opposite direction. field pushing in the opposite direction. We took a grape and cut measure it out We took a grape and cut measure it out We took a grape and cut measure it out length of 5. length of 5. length of 5. You would find that it's about 12 lb that that that and then after that and then after that and then after that find the best Nice.